(laughing)
If you shall chance, Camillo,
to visit Bohemia,
on the like occasion whereon my services
are now on foot,
you shall see, as I have said,
great difference betwixt our Bohemia and your Sicilia.
I think, this coming summer, the King of Sicilia
means to pay Bohemia the visitation
which he justly owes him.
Wherein our entertainment shall shame us
we will be justified in our loves; for indeed--
Beseech you,--
Verily, I speak it in the freedom of my knowledge:
we cannot with such magnificence--
in so rare--I know not what to say.
We will give you sleepy drinks,
that your senses, unintelligent of our insufficience,
may, though they cannot praise us,
as little accuse us.
You pay a great deal too dear for what's given freely.
Believe me, I speak as my understanding instructs me
and as mine honesty puts it to utterance.
Sicilia cannot show himself over-kind to Bohemia.
They were trained together in their childhoods;
and there rooted betwixt them then such an affection,
which cannot choose but branch now.
Since their more mature dignities
and royal necessities
made separation of their society, their encounters,
though not personal, have been royally attorneyed
with interchange of gifts, letters,
loving embassies; that they have seemed to be together,
though absent, shook hands, as over a vast,
and embraced, as it were,
from the ends of opposed winds.
The heavens continue their loves!
I think there is not in the world
either malice or matter to alter it.
You have an unspeakable comfort
of your young prince Mamillius:
it is a gentleman of the greatest promise
that ever came into my note.
I very well agree with you in the hopes of him:
it is a gallant child;
one that indeed physics the subject,
makes old hearts fresh:
they that went on crutches ere he was born
desire yet their life to see him a man.
Would they else be content to die?
Yes; if there were no other excuse
why they should desire to live.
If the king had no son,
they would desire to live on crutches
till he had one.
Nine changes of the watery star hath been
The shepherd's note since we have left our throne
Without a burthen: time as long again my brother,
would be filled up with our thanks;
And yet we should, for perpetuity,
Go hence in debt: and therefore, like a cipher,
Yet standing in rich place,
I multiply with one 'We thank you'
many thousands more that go before it.
Stay your thanks a while;
And pay them when you part.
Sir, that's to-morrow.
I am question'd by my fears, of what may chance
Or breed upon our absence; that may blow
No sneaping winds at home, to make us say
'This is put forth too truly:' besides, I have stay'd
To tire your royalty.
We are tougher, brother,
Than you can put us to't.
No longer stay.
One seven-night longer.
Very sooth, to-morrow.
We'll part the time between's then;
and in that I'll no gainsaying.
Press me not, beseech you, so.
There is no tongue that moves, none, none i' the world,
So soon as yours could win me: so it should now,
Were there necessity in your request,
'Twere needful I denied it.
My affairs do even drag me homeward:
which to hinder were in your love a whip to me;
my stay to you a charge and trouble:
to save both, farewell, our brother.
Tongue-tied, our queen? speak you.
I had thought, sir, to have held my peace until
You have drawn oaths from him not to stay.
You, sir, Charge him too coldly.
Tell him, you are sure All in Bohemia's well;
this satisfaction the by-gone day proclaim'd:
say this to him, he's beat from his best ward.
Well said, Hermione.
To tell, he longs to see his son, were strong:
But let him say so then, and let him go;
But let him swear so, and he shall not stay,
We'll thwack him hence with distaffs.
Yet of your royal presence I'll adventure
The borrow of a week. When at Bohemia
You take my lord, I'll give him my commission
To let him there a month behind the gest
Prefix'd for's parting: yet, good deed, Leontes,
I love thee not a jar o' the clock behind
What lady-she her lord. You'll stay?
No, madam.
Nay, but you will?
I may not, verily.
Verily!
You put me off with limber vows;
but I, Though you would seek to unsphere
the stars with oaths,
Should yet say 'Sir, no going.'
Verily, You shall not go: a lady's 'Verily' 's
As potent as a lord's. Will you go yet?
Force me to keep you as a prisoner,
Not like a guest; so you shall pay your fees
When you depart, and save your thanks. How say you?
My prisoner? or my guest? by your dread 'Verily,'
One of them you shall be.
Your guest, then, madam:
To be your prisoner should import offending;
Which is for me less easy to commit
Than you to punish.
Not your gaoler, then,
But your kind hostess.
Come, I'll question you
Of my lord's tricks and yours when you were boys:
You were pretty lordings then?
We were, fair queen,
Two lads that thought there was no more behind
But such a day to-morrow as to-day,
And to be boy eternal.
Was not my lord
The verier wag o' the two?
We were as twinn'd lambs that did frisk i' the sun,
And bleat the one at the other:
what we changed
Was innocence for innocence;
we knew not
The doctrine of ill-doing, nor dream'd that any did.
Had we pursued that life,
And our weak spirits ne'er been higher rear'd
With stronger blood, we should have answer'd heaven
Boldly 'not guilty;' the imposition clear'd
Hereditary ours.
By this we gather
You have tripp'd since.
O my most sacred lady!
Temptations have since then been born to's;
for in those unfledged days was my wife a girl;
Your precious self had then not cross'd the eyes
Of my young play-fellow.
Grace to boot!
Of this make no conclusion, lest you say
Your queen and I are devils: yet go on;
The offences we have made you do we'll answer,
If you first sinn'd with us and that with us
You did continue fault and that you slipp'd
not with any but with us.
Is he won yet?
He'll stay my lord.
At my request he would not.
Hermione, my dearest, thou never spokest
To better purpose.
Never?
Never, but once.
What! have I twice said well? when was't before?
I prithee tell me; cram's with praise, and make's
As fat as tame things: one good deed dying tongueless
Slaughters a thousand waiting upon that.
Our praises are our wages: you may ride's
With one soft kiss a thousand furlongs ere
With spur we beat an acre. But to the goal:
My last good deed was to entreat his stay:
What was my first? it has an elder sister,
Or I mistake you: O, would her name were Grace!
But once before I spoke to the purpose: when?
Nay, let me have't; I long.
Why, that was when
Three crabbed months had sour'd themselves to death,
Ere I could make thee open thy white hand
And clap thyself my love: then didst thou utter
'I am yours for ever.'
'Tis grace indeed.
Why, lo you now, I have spoke to the purpose twice:
The one for ever earn'd a royal husband;
The other for some while a friend.
Too hot, too hot!
To mingle friendship far is mingling bloods.
I have tremor cordis on me: my heart dances;
But not for joy; not joy. This entertainment
May a free face put on, derive a liberty
From heartiness, from bounty, fertile bosom,
And well become the agent; 't may, I grant;
But to be paddling palms and pinching fingers,
As now they are, and making practised smiles,
As in a looking-glass, and then to sigh, as 'twere
The mort o' the deer; O, that is entertainment
My bosom likes not, nor my brows!
Mamillius, Art thou my boy?
Ay, my good lord.
I' fecks!
Why, that's my bawcock. What, hast
smutch'd thy nose?
They say it is a copy out of mine. Come, captain,
We must be neat; not neat, but cleanly, captain:
And yet the steer, the heifer and the calf
Are all call'd neat.--Still virginalling
Upon his palm!--How now, you wanton calf!
Art thou my calf?
Yes, if you will, my lord.
Thou want'st a rough pash and the shoots that I have,
To be full like me: yet they say we are
Almost as like as eggs; women say so,
That will say anything but were they false
As o'er-dyed blacks, as wind, as waters, false
As dice are to be wish'd by one that fixes
No bourn 'twixt his and mine, yet were it true
To say this boy were like me. Come, sir page,
Look on me with your welkin eye: sweet villain!
Most dear'st! my collop!
Can thy dam?--may't be?--
Affection! thy intention stabs the centre:
Thou dost make possible things not so held,
Communicatest with dreams;--how can this be?--
With what's unreal thou coactive art,
And fellow'st nothing: then 'tis very credent
Thou mayst co-join with something; and thou dost,
And that beyond commission, and I find it,
And that to the infection of my brains
And hardening of my brows.
What means Sicilia?
He something seems unsettled.
How, my lord!
What cheer? how is't with you, best brother?
You look as if you held a brow of much distraction
Are you moved, my lord?
No, in good earnest.
How sometimes nature will betray its folly,
Its tenderness, and make itself a pastime
To harder bosoms! Looking on the lines
Of my boy's face, methoughts I did recoil
Twenty-three years, and saw myself unbreech'd,
In my green velvet coat, my dagger muzzled,
Lest it should bite its master, and so prove,
As ornaments oft do, too dangerous:
How like, methought, I then was to this kernel,
This squash, this gentleman. Mine honest friend,
Will you take eggs for money?
No, my lord, I'll fight.
You will! why, happy man be's dole! My brother,
Are you so fond of your young prince
as we do seem to be of ours?
If at home, sir,
He's all my exercise, my mirth, my matter,
Now my sworn friend and then mine enemy,
My parasite, my soldier, statesman, all:
He makes a July's day short as December,
And with his varying childness cures in me
Thoughts that would thick my blood.
So stands this squire
Officed with me: we two will walk, my lord,
And leave you to your graver steps.
Hermione, How thou lovest us, show in our brother's welcome;
Let what is dear in Sicily be cheap:
Next to thyself and my young rover,
he's apparent to my heart.
If you would seek us,
We are yours i' the garden: shall's attend you there?
To your own bents dispose you: you'll be found,
Be you beneath the sky.
I am angling now,
Though you perceive me not how I give line.
Go to, go to!
How she holds up the neb, the bill to him!
And arms her with the boldness of a wife
To her allowing husband!
Gone already!
Inch-thick, knee-deep, o'er head
and ears a fork'd one!
Go, play, boy, play: thy mother plays,
and I play too, but so disgraced a part, whose issue
Will hiss me to my grave: contempt and clamour
Will be my knell. Go, play, boy, play.
There have been,
Or I am much deceived, cuckolds ere now;
And many a man there is, even at this present,
Now while I speak this, holds his wife by the arm,
That little thinks she has been sluiced in's absence
And his pond fish'd by his next neighbour,
by Sir Smile, his neighbour: nay, there's comfort in't
Whiles other men have gates and those gates open'd,
As mine, against their will. Should all despair
That have revolted wives, the tenth of mankind
Would hang themselves. Physic for't there is none;
It is a bawdy planet, that will strike
Where 'tis predominant; and 'tis powerful, think it,
From east, west, north and south: be it concluded,
No barricado for a belly; know't;
It will let in and out the enemy
With bag and baggage: many thousand on's
Have the disease, and feel't not. How now, boy!
I am like you, they say.
Why that's some comfort. What, Camillo there?
Ay, my good lord.
Go play, Mamillius; thou'rt an honest man.
Camillo, this great sir will yet stay longer.
You had much ado to make his anchor hold:
When you cast out, it still came home.
Didst note it?
He would not stay at your petitions: made
His business more material.
Didst perceive it?
They're here with me already, whispering, rounding
'Sicilia is a so-forth:' 'tis far gone,
When I shall gust it last.
How came't, Camillo, That he did stay?
At the good queen's entreaty.
At the queen's be't: 'good' should be pertinent
But, so it is, it is not. Was this taken
By any understanding pate but thine?
For thy conceit is soaking, will draw in
More than the common blocks: not noted, is't,
But of the finer natures? by some severals
Of head-piece extraordinary? lower messes
Perchance are to this business purblind? say.
Business, my lord! I think most understand
Bohemia stays here longer.
Ha!
Stays here longer.
Ay, but why?
To satisfy your highness and the entreaties
Of our most gracious mistress.
Satisfy!
The entreaties of your mistress! satisfy!
Let that suffice. I have trusted thee, Camillo,
With all the nearest things to my heart, as well
My chamber-councils, wherein, priest-like, thou
Hast cleansed my bosom, I from thee departed
Thy penitent reform'd: but we have been
Deceived in thy integrity, deceived
In that which seems so.
Be it forbid, my lord!
To bide upon't, thou art not honest, or,
If thou inclinest that way, thou art a coward,
Which hoxes honesty behind, restraining
From course required; or else thou must be counted
A servant grafted in my serious trust
And therein negligent; or else a fool
That seest a game play'd home, the rich stake drawn,
And takest it all for jest.
My gracious lord,
I may be negligent, foolish and fearful;
In every one of these no man is free,
But that his negligence, his folly, fear,
Among the infinite doings of the world,
Sometime puts forth. In your affairs, my lord,
If ever I were wilful-negligent,
It was my folly; if industriously
I play'd the fool, it was my negligence,
Not weighing well the end; if ever fearful
To do a thing, where I the issue doubted,
Where of the execution did cry out
Against the non-performance, 'twas a fear
Which oft infects the wisest: these, my lord,
Are such allow'd infirmities that honesty
Is never free of. But, beseech your grace,
Be plainer with me; let me know my trespass
By its own visage: if I then deny it,
'Tis none of mine.
Ha' not you seen, Camillo,--
But that's past doubt, you have, or your eye-glass
Is thicker than a cuckold's horn,--or heard,--
For to a vision so apparent rumour
Cannot be mute,--or thought,--for cogitation
Resides not in that man that does not think,--
My wife is slippery?
If thou wilt confess,
Or else be impudently negative,
To have nor eyes nor ears nor thought, then say
My wife's a hobby-horse, deserves a name
As rank as any flax-wench that puts to
Before her troth-plight: say't and justify't.
I would not be a stander-by to hear
My sovereign mistress clouded so, without
My present vengeance taken: 'shrew my heart,
You never spoke what did become you less
Than this; which to reiterate were sin
As deep as that, though true.
Is whispering nothing?
Is leaning cheek to cheek? is meeting noses?
Kissing with inside lip? stopping the career
Of laughing with a sigh?--a note infallible
Of breaking honesty--horsing foot on foot?
Skulking in corners? wishing clocks more swift?
Hours, minutes? noon, midnight? and all eyes
Blind with the pin and web but theirs, theirs only,
That would unseen be wicked? is this nothing?
Why, then the world and all that's in't is nothing;
The covering sky is nothing; Bohemia nothing;
My wife is nothing; nor nothing have these nothings,
If this be nothing.
Good my lord, be cured
Of this diseased opinion, and betimes;
For 'tis most dangerous.
Say it be, 'tis true.
No, no, my lord.
It is; you lie, you lie:
I say thou liest, Camillo, and I hate thee,
Pronounce thee a gross lout, a mindless slave,
Or else a hovering temporizer, that
Canst with thine eyes at once see good and evil,
Inclining to them both: were my wife's liver
Infected as her life, she would not live
The running of one glass.
Who does infect her?
Why, he that wears her like a medal, hanging
About his neck, Bohemia: who, if I
Had servants true about me, that bare eyes
To see alike mine honour as their profits,
Their own particular thrifts, they would do that
Which should undo more doing: ay, and thou,
His cupbearer,--whom I from meaner form
Have benched and reared to worship, who mayst see
Plainly as heaven sees earth and earth sees heaven,
How I am galled,--mightst bespice a cup,
To give mine enemy a lasting wink;
Which draught to me were cordial.
Sir, my lord,
I could do this, but I cannot
Believe this crack to be in my dread mistress,
So sovereignly being honourable.
I have loved thee,--
Make that thy question, and go rot!
Dost think I am so muddy, so unsettled,
To appoint myself in this vexation, sully
The purity and whiteness of my sheets,
Which to preserve is sleep, which being spotted
Is goads, thorns, nettles, tails of wasps,
Give scandal to the blood o' the prince my son,
Who I do think is mine and love as mine,
Without ripe moving to't? Would I do this?
Could man so blench?
I must believe you, sir:
I do; and will fetch off Bohemia for't;
Provided that, when he's removed, your highness
Will take again your queen as yours at first,
Even for your son's sake; and thereby for sealing
The injury of tongues in courts and kingdoms
Known and allied to yours.
Thou dost advise me
Even so as I mine own course have set down:
I'll give no blemish to her honour, none.
My lord,
Go then; and with a countenance as clear
As friendship wears at feasts, keep with Bohemia
And with your queen. I am his cupbearer:
If from me he have wholesome beverage,
Account me not your servant.
This is all:
Do't and thou hast the one half of my heart;
Do't not, thou split'st thine own.
I'll do't, my lord.
I will seem friendly, as thou hast advised me.
O miserable lady! But, for me,
What case stand I in? I must be the poisoner
Of good Polixenes; and my ground to do't
Is the obedience to a master, one
Who in rebellion with himself will have
All that are his so too. To do this deed,
Promotion follows. If I could find example
Of thousands that had struck anointed kings
And flourish'd after, I'ld not do't; but since
Nor brass nor stone nor parchment bears not one,
Let villany itself forswear't. I must
Forsake the court: to do't, or no, is certain
To me a break-neck. Happy star, reign now!
Here comes Bohemia.
This is strange: methinks
My favour here begins to warp. Not speak?
Good day, Camillo.
Hail, most royal sir!
What is the news i' the court?
None rare, my lord.
The king hath on him such a countenance
As he had lost some province and a region
Loved as he loves himself: even now I met him
With customary compliment; when he,
Wafting his eyes to the contrary and falling
A lip of much contempt, speeds from me
and so leaves me to consider what is breeding
That changeth thus his manners.
I dare not know, my lord.
How! dare not! do not. Do you know, and dare not?
Be intelligent to me: 'tis thereabouts;
For, to yourself, what you do know, you must.
And cannot say, you dare not. Good Camillo,
Your changed complexions are to me a mirror
Which shows me mine changed too; for I must be
A party in this alteration,
finding Myself thus alter'd with 't.
There is a sickness
Which puts some of us in distemper,
but I cannot name the disease; and it is caught
Of you that yet are well.
How! caught of me!
Make me not sighted like the basilisk:
I have look'd on thousands, who have sped the better
By my regard, but kill'd none so. -
I beseech you,
If you know aught which does behove my knowledge
Thereof to be inform'd, imprison't not
In ignorant concealment.
I may not answer.
A sickness caught of me, and yet I well!
I must be answer'd. Dost thou hear, Camillo,
I conjure thee, by all the parts of man
Which honour does acknowledge,
whereof the least
Is not this suit of mine, that thou declare
What incidency thou dost guess of harm
Is creeping toward me; how far off, how near;
Which way to be prevented, if to be;
If not, how best to bear it.
Sir, I will tell you;
Since I am charged in honour and by him
That I think honourable: therefore mark my counsel,
Which must be even as swiftly follow'd
as I mean to utter it, or both yourself and me
Cry lost, and so good night!
On, good Camillo.
I am appointed him to murder you.
By whom?
By the king.
For what?
He thinks, nay, with all confidence he swears,
As he had seen't or been an instrument
To vice you to't, that you have touch'd his queen
Forbiddenly.
O, then my best blood turn
To an infected jelly and my name
Be yoked with his that did betray the Best!
Turn then my freshest reputation
to a savour that may strike the dullest nostril
Where I arrive, and my approach be shunn'd,
Nay, hated too, worse than the great'st infection
That e'er was heard or read!
Swear his thought over
By each particular star in heaven and
By all their influences, you may as well
Forbid the sea for to obey the moon
As or by oath remove or counsel shake
The fabric of his folly, whose foundation
Is piled upon his faith and will continue
The standing of his body.
How should this grow?
I know not: but I am sure 'tis safer
to avoid what's grown than question how 'tis born.
If therefore you dare trust my honesty,
That lies enclosed in this trunk which you
Shall bear along impawn'd, away to-night!
Your followers I will whisper to the business,
And will by twos and threes at several posterns
Clear them o' the city. For myself, I'll put
My fortunes to your service, which are here
By this discovery lost. Be not uncertain;
For, by the honour of my parents,
I have utter'd truth: which if you seek to prove,
I dare not stand by; nor shall you be safer
Than one condemn'd by the king's own mouth,
thereon his execution sworn.
I do believe thee:
I saw his heart in 's face. Give me thy hand:
Be pilot to me and thy places shall
Still neighbour mine. My ships are ready
and my people did expect my hence departure
Two days ago. This jealousy
Is for a precious creature: as she's rare,
Must it be great, and as his person's mighty,
Must it be violent, and as he does conceive
He is dishonour'd by a man which ever
Profess'd to him, why, his revenges must
In that be made more bitter. Fear o'ershades me:
Good expedition be my friend, and comfort
The gracious queen, part of his theme, but nothing
Of his ill-ta'en suspicion! Come, Camillo;
I will respect thee as a father
if thou bear'st my life off hence: let us avoid.
It is in mine authority to command
The keys of all the posterns: please your highness
To take the urgent hour. Come, sir, away.
Take the boy to you: he so troubles me,
'Tis past enduring.
Come, my gracious lord,
Shall I be your playfellow?
No, I'll none of you.
You'll kiss me hard and speak to me as
if I were a baby still. I love you better.
And why so, my lord?
Not for because
Your brows are blacker; yet black brows, they say,
Become some women best, so that there be not
Too much hair there, but in a semicircle
Or a half-moon made with a pen.
Who taught you this?
I learnt it out of women's faces.
Pray now what colour are your eyebrows?
Blue, my lord.
Nay, that's a mock: I have seen a lady's nose
That has been blue, but not her eyebrows.
Hark ye;
The queen your mother rounds apace: we shall
Present our services to a fine new prince
One of these days; and then you'ld wanton with us,
If we would have you.
She is spread of late
Into a goodly bulk: good time encounter her!
What wisdom stirs amongst you? Come, sir,
now I am for you again: pray you, sit by us,
And tell 's a tale.
Merry or sad shall't be?
As merry as you will.
A sad tale's best for winter:
I have one of sprites and goblins.
Let's have that, good sir.
Come on, sit down: come on, and do your best
To fright me with your sprites; you're powerful at it.
There was a man--
Nay, come, sit down; then on.
Dwelt by a churchyard: I will tell it softly;
Yond crickets shall not hear it.
Come on, then,
And give't me in mine ear.
Was he met there? his train? Camillo with him?
Behind the tuft of pines I met them; never
Saw I men scour so on their way: I eyed them
Even to their ships.
How blest am I
In my just censure, in my true opinion!
Alack, for lesser knowledge! how accursed
In being so blest! There may be in the cup
A spider steep'd, and one may drink, depart,
And yet partake no venom, for his knowledge
Is not infected: but if one present
The abhorr'd ingredient to his eye, make known
How he hath drunk, he cracks his gorge, his sides,
With violent hefts. I have drunk,
and seen the spider.
Camillo was his help in this, his pander:
There is a plot against my life, my crown;
All's true that is mistrusted: that false villain
Whom I employ'd was pre-employ'd by him:
He has discover'd my design, and I
Remain a pinch'd thing; yea, a very trick
For them to play at will.
How came the posterns So easily open?
By his great authority;
Which often hath no less prevail'd than so
On your command.
I know't too well.
Give me the boy: I am glad you did not nurse him:
Though he does bear some signs of me,
yet you have too much blood in him.
What is this? sport?
Bear the boy hence; he shall not come about her;
Away with him! and let her sport herself
With that she's big with; for 'tis Polixenes
Has made thee swell thus.
But I'ld say he had not,
And I'll be sworn you would believe my saying,
Howe'er you lean to the nayward.
You, my lords,
Look on her, mark her well; be but about
To say 'she is a goodly lady,'
and the justice of your bearts will thereto add
'Tis pity she's not honest, honourable:'
Praise her but for this her without-door form,
Which on my faith deserves high speech, and straight
The shrug, the hum or ha, these petty brands
That calumny doth use--O, I am out--
That mercy does, for calumny will sear
Virtue itself:
these shrugs, these hums and ha's,
When you have said 'she's goodly,' come between
Ere you can say 'she's honest:' but be 't known,
From him that has most cause to grieve it should be,
She's an adulteress.
Should a villain say so,
The most replenish'd villain in the world,
He were as much more villain: you, my lord,
Do but mistake.
You have mistook, my lady,
Polixenes for Leontes: O thou thing!
Which I'll not call a creature of thy place,
Lest barbarism, making me the precedent,
Should a like language use to all degrees
And mannerly distinguishment leave out
Betwixt the prince and beggar: I have said
She's an adulteress; I have said with whom:
More, she's a traitor and Camillo is
A federary with her, and one that knows
What she should shame to know herself
But with her most vile principal, that she's
A bed-swerver, even as bad as those
That vulgars give bold'st titles, ay, and privy
To this their late escape.
No, by my life.
Privy to none of this. How will this grieve you,
When you shall come to clearer knowledge,
that You thus have publish'd me! Gentle my lord,
You scarce can right me throughly then to say
You did mistake.
No; if I mistake
In those foundations which I build upon,
The centre is not big enough to bear
A school-boy's top. Away with her! to prison!
He who shall speak for her is afar off guilty
But that he speaks.
There's some ill planet reigns:
I must be patient till the heavens look
With an aspect more favourable.
Good my lords,
I am not prone to weeping, as our sex
Commonly are; the want of which vain dew
Perchance shall dry your pities: but I have
That honourable grief lodged here which burns
Worse than tears drown: beseech you all, my lords,
With thoughts so qualified as your charities
Shall best instruct you, measure me;
and so the king's will be perform'd!
Shall I be heard?
Who is't that goes with me? Beseech your highness,
My women may be with me; for you see
My plight requires it. Do not weep, good fools;
There is no cause: when you shall know your mistress
Has deserved prison, then abound in tears
As I come out: this action I now go on
Is for my better grace. Adieu, my lord:
I never wish'd to see you sorry;
now I trust I shall.
My women, come; you have leave.
Go, do our bidding; hence!
Beseech your highness, call the queen again.
Be certain what you do, sir, lest your justice
Prove violence; in the which three great ones suffer,
Yourself, your queen, your son.
For her, my lord,
I dare my life lay down and will do't, sir,
Please you to accept it, that the queen is spotless
I' the eyes of heaven and to you; I mean,
In this which you accuse her.
If it prove she's otherwise,
I'll keep my stables
where I lodge my wife; I'll go in couples with her;
Than when I feel and see her no farther trust her;
For every inch of woman in the world,
Ay, every dram of woman's flesh is false, If she be.
Hold your peaces.
Good my lord,--
It is for you we speak, not for ourselves:
You are abused and by some putter-on
That will be damn'd for't; would I knew the villain,
I would land-damn him. Be she honour-flaw'd,
I have three daughters; the eldest is eleven
The second and the third, nine, and some five;
If this prove true, they'll pay for't:
by mine honour,
I'll geld 'em all; fourteen they shall not see,
To bring false generations: they are co-heirs;
And I had rather glib myself than they
Should not produce fair issue.
Cease; no more.
You smell this business with a sense as cold
As is a dead man's nose: but I do see't and feel't
As you feel doing thus; and see withal
The instruments that feel.
If it be so,
We need no grave to bury honesty:
There's not a grain of it the face to sweeten
Of the whole dungy earth.
What! lack I credit?
I had rather you did lack than I, my lord,
Upon this ground; and more it would content me
To have her honour true than your suspicion,
Be blamed for't how you might.
Why, what need we
Commune with you of this, but rather follow
Our forceful instigation? Our prerogative
Calls not your counsels, but our natural goodness
Imparts this; which if you, or stupefied
Or seeming so in skill, cannot or will not
Relish a truth like us, inform yourselves
We need no more of your advice: the matter,
The loss, the gain, the ordering on't, is all
Properly ours.
And I wish, my liege,
You had only in your silent judgment tried it,
Without more overture.
How could that be?
Either thou art most ignorant by age,
Or thou wert born a fool. Camillo's flight,
Added to their familiarity,
Which was as gross as ever touch'd conjecture,
That lack'd sight only, nought for approbation
But only seeing, all other circumstances
Made up to the deed, doth push on this proceeding:
Yet, for a greater confirmation,
For in an act of this importance 'twere
Most piteous to be wild, I have dispatch'd in post
To sacred Delphos, to Apollo's temple,
Cleomenes and Dion, whom you know
Of stuff'd sufficiency: now from the oracle
They will bring all; whose spiritual counsel had,
Shall stop or spur me. Have I done well?
Well done, my lord.
Though I am satisfied and need no more
Than what I know, yet shall the oracle
Give rest to the minds of others, such as he
Whose ignorant credulity will not
Come up to the truth. So have we thought it good
From our free person she should be confined,
Lest that the treachery of the two fled hence
Be left her to perform. Come, follow us;
We are to speak in public; for this business
Will raise us all.
To laughter, as I take it,
If the good truth were known.
The keeper of the prison, call to him;
let him have knowledge who I am.
Good lady,
No court in Europe is too good for thee;
What dost thou then in prison?
Now, good sir,
You know me, do you not?
For a worthy lady
And one whom much I honour.
Pray you then,
Conduct me to the queen.
I may not, madam:
To the contrary I have express commandment.
Here's ado,
To lock up honesty and honour
from the access of gentle visitors!
Is't lawful, pray you,
To see her women? any of them? Emilia?
So please you, madam,
To put apart these your attendants,
I shall bring Emilia forth.
I pray now, call her.
Withdraw yourselves.
And, madam,
I must be present at your conference.
Well, be't so, prithee.
Here's such ado to make no stain a stain
As passes colouring.
Dear gentlewoman,
How fares our gracious lady?
As well as one so great and so forlorn
May hold together: on her frights and griefs,
Which never tender lady hath born greater,
She is something before her time deliver'd.
A boy?
A daughter, and a goodly babe,
Lusty and like to live: the queen receives
Much comfort in't; says 'My poor prisoner,
I am innocent as you.'
I dare be sworn
These dangerous unsafe lunes i' the king,
beshrew them!
He must be told on't, and he shall: the office
Becomes a woman best; I'll take't upon me:
If I prove honey-mouth'd let my tongue blister
And never to my red-look'd anger be
The trumpet any more. Pray you, Emilia,
Commend my best obedience to the queen:
If she dares trust me with her little babe,
I'll show't the king and undertake to be
Her advocate to the loud'st. We do not know
How he may soften at the sight o' the child:
The silence often of pure innocence
Persuades when speaking fails.
Most worthy madam,
Your honour and your goodness is so evident
That your free undertaking cannot miss
A thriving issue: there is no lady living
So meet for this great errand. Please your ladyship
To visit the next room, I'll presently
Acquaint the queen of your most noble offer;
Who but to-day hammer'd of this design,
But durst not tempt a minister of honour,
Lest she should be denied.
Tell her, Emilia.
I'll use that tongue I have: if wit flow from't
As boldness from my bosom, let 't not be doubted
I shall do good.
Now be you blest for it!
I'll to the queen: please you,
come something nearer.
Madam, if't please the queen to send the babe,
I know not what I shall incur to pass it,
Having no warrant.
You need not fear it, sir:
This child was prisoner to the womb and is
By law and process of great nature thence
Freed and enfranchised, not a party to
The anger of the king nor guilty of,
If any be, the trespass of the queen.
I do believe it.
Do not you fear: upon mine honour,
I will stand betwixt you and danger.
Nor night nor day no rest: it is but weakness
To bear the matter thus; mere weakness. If
The cause were not in being,--part o' the cause,
She the adulteress; for the harlot king
Is quite beyond mine arm, out of the blank
And level of my brain, plot-proof; but she
I can hook to me: say that she were gone,
Given to the fire, a moiety of my rest
Might come to me again. Who's there?
My lord?
How does the boy?
He took good rest to-night;
'Tis hoped his sickness is discharged.
To see his nobleness!
Conceiving the dishonour of his mother,
He straight declined, droop'd, took it deeply,
Fasten'd and fix'd the shame on't in himself,
Threw off his spirit, his appetite, his sleep,
And downright languish'd. Leave me solely: go,
See how he fares.
Fie, fie! no thought of him:
The thought of my revenges that way
Recoil upon me: in himself too mighty,
And in his parties, his alliance; let him be
Until a time may serve: for present vengeance,
Take it on her. Camillo and Polixenes
Laugh at me, make their pastime at my sorrow:
They should not laugh if I could reach them, nor
Shall she within my power.
You must not enter.
Nay, rather, good my lords, be second to me:
Fear you his tyrannous passion
more, alas, than the queen's life?
a gracious innocent soul,
More free than he is jealous.
That's enough.
Madam, he hath not slept tonight;
commanded none should come at him.
Not so hot, good sir:
I come to bring him sleep.
'Tis such as you,
That creep like shadows by him
and do sigh at each his needless heavings,
such as you nourish the cause of his awaking:
I do come with words as medicinal as true,
Honest as either, to purge him of that humour
That presses him from sleep.
What noise there, ho?
No noise, my lord; but needful conference
About some gossips for your highness.
How!
Away with that audacious lady! Antigonus,
I charged thee that she should not come about me:
I knew she would.
I told her so, my lord,
On your displeasure's peril and on mine,
She should not visit you.
What, canst not rule her?
From all dishonesty he can: in this,
Unless he take the course that you have done,
Commit me for committing honour,
trust it,
He shall not rule me.
La you now, you hear:
When she will take the rein I let her run;
But she'll not stumble.
Good my liege, I come;
And, I beseech you, hear me,
who profess myself your loyal servant, your physician,
Your most obedient counsellor,
yet that dare less appear so in comforting your evils,
Than such as most seem yours:
I say, I come
From your good queen.
Good queen!
Good queen, my lord,
Good queen; I say good queen;
And would by combat make her good,
so were I a man, the worst about you.
Force her hence.
Let him that makes but trifles of his eyes
First hand me: on mine own accord I'll off;
But first I'll do my errand.
The good queen,
For she is good, hath brought you forth a daughter;
Here 'tis;
commends it to your blessing.
Out!
A mankind witch! Hence with her, out o' door:
A most intelligencing bawd!
Not so:
I am as ignorant in that as you
In so entitling me, and no less honest
Than you are mad;
which is enough, I'll warrant,
As this world goes, to pass for honest.
Traitors!
Will you not push her out?
Give her the bastard. Thou dotard!
thou art woman-tired, unroosted thy dame Partlet here.
Take up the bastard;
Take't up, I say; give't to thy crone.
For ever unvenerable be thy hands,
if thou takest up the princess by that forced baseness
Which he has put upon't!
He dreads his wife.
So I would you did;
then 'twere past all doubt,
you'ld call your children yours.
A nest of traitors!
I am none, by this good light.
Nor I, nor any but one that's here,
and that's himself, for he
The sacred honour of himself, his queen's,
His hopeful son's, his babe's, betrays to slander,
Whose sting is sharper than the sword's;
and will not--
For, as the case now stands,
it is a curse
He cannot be compell'd to't--once remove
The root of his opinion, which is rotten
As ever oak or stone was sound.
A callat
Of boundless tongue, who late hath beat her husband
And now baits me! This brat is none of mine;
It is the issue of Polixenes:
Hence with it, and together with the dam
Commit them to the fire!
It is yours;
And, might we lay the old proverb to your charge,
So like you, 'tis the worse. Behold, my lords,
Although the print be little,
the whole matter and copy of the father,
eye, nose, lip,
The trick of's frown, his forehead, nay, the valley,
The pretty dimples of his chin and cheek,
His smiles,
The very mould and frame of hand, nail, finger:
And thou, good goddess Nature, which hast made it
So like to him
that got it, if thou hast the ordering of the mind too,
'mongst all colours
No yellow in't, lest she suspect, as he does,
Her children not her husband's!
A gross hag
And, lozel, thou art worthy to be hang'd,
That wilt not stay her tongue.
Hang all the husbands
That cannot do that feat,
you'll leave yourself hardly one subject.
Once more, take her hence.
A most unworthy and unnatural lord
Can do no more.
I'll ha' thee burnt.
I care not:
It is an heretic that makes the fire,
Not she which burns in't.
I'll not call you tyrant;
But this most cruel usage of your queen,
Not able to produce more accusation
Than your own weak-hinged fancy, something savours
Of tyranny and will ignoble make you,
Yea, scandalous to the world.
On your allegiance,
Out of the chamber with her! Were I a tyrant,
Where were her life? she durst not call me so,
If she did know me one. Away with her!
I pray you, do not push me; I'll be gone.
Look to your babe, my lord; 'tis yours:
Jove send her
A better guiding spirit! What needs these hands?
You, that are thus so tender o'er his follies,
Will never do him good, not one of you.
So, so: farewell; we are gone.
Thou, traitor, hast set on thy wife to this.
My child? away with't! Even thou, that hast
A heart so tender o'er it, take it hence
And see it instantly consumed with fire;
Even thou and none but thou. Take it up straight:
Within this hour bring me word 'tis done,
And by good testimony,
or I'll seize thy life, with what thou else call'st thine.
If thou refuse and wilt encounter with my wrath,
say so;
The bastard brains with these my proper hands
Shall I dash out. Go, take it to the fire;
For thou set'st on thy wife.
I did not, sir:
These lords, my noble fellows, if they please,
Can clear me in't.
We can: my royal liege,
He is not guilty of her coming hither.
You're liars all.
Beseech your highness, give us better credit:
We have always truly served you, and beseech
So to esteem of us, and on our knees we beg,
As recompense of our dear services
Past and to come, that you do change this purpose,
Which being so horrible, so bloody,
must lead on to some foul issue: we all kneel.
I am a feather for each wind that blows:
Shall I live on to see this bastard kneel
And call me father? better burn it now
Than curse it then. But be it; let it live.
It shall not neither. You, sir, come you hither;
You that have been so tenderly officious
With Lady Margery, your midwife there,
To save this bastard's life,--for 'tis a bastard,
So sure as this beard's grey,
--what will you adventure
To save this brat's life?
Any thing, my lord,
That my ability may undergo
And nobleness impose: at least thus much:
I'll pawn the little blood which I have left
To save the innocent: any thing possible.
It shall be possible. Swear by this sword
Thou wilt perform my bidding.
I will, my lord.
Mark and perform it, see'st thou!
for the fail of any point in't
shall not only be Ddeath to thyself
but to thy lewd-tongued wife,
Whom for this time we pardon. We enjoin thee,
As thou art liege-man to us, that thou carry
This female bastard hence and that thou bear it
To some remote and desert place quite out
Of our dominions, and that there thou leave it,
Without more mercy, to its own protection
And favour of the climate. As by strange fortune
It came to us, I do in justice charge thee,
On thy soul's peril and thy body's torture,
That thou commend it strangely to some place
Where chance may nurse or end it. Take it up.
I swear to do this,
though a present death had been more merciful.
Come on, poor babe:
Some powerful spirit instruct the kites and ravens
To be thy nurses! Wolves and bears, they say
Casting their savageness aside have done
Like offices of pity.
Sir, be prosperous
In more than this deed does require!
And blessing against this cruelty fight on thy side,
Poor thing, condemn'd to loss!
No, I'll not rear
Another's issue.
Please your highness,
posts from those you sent to the oracle
are come an hour since:
Cleomenes and Dion,
Being well arrived from Delphos, are both landed,
Hasting to the court.
So please you, sir, their speed
Hath been beyond account.
Twenty-three days they have been absent:
'tis good speed;
foretells the great Apollo
suddenly will have the truth of this appear.
Prepare you, lords; Summon a session,
that we may arraign our most disloyal lady,
for, as she hath been publicly accused,
so shall she have a just and open trial.
While she lives
My heart will be a burthen to me.
Leave me, and think upon my bidding.
The climate's delicate, the air most sweet,
Fertile the isle, the temple much surpassing
The common praise it bears.
I shall report,
For most it caught me, the celestial habits,
Methinks I so should term them, and the reverence
Of the grave wearers. O, the sacrifice!
How ceremonious, solemn and unearthly
It was i' the offering!
But of all, the burst
And the ear-deafening voice o' the oracle,
Kin to Jove's thunder, so surprised my sense.
That I was nothing.
If the event o' the journey
Prove as successful to the queen,--O be't so!--
As it hath been to us rare, pleasant, speedy,
The time is worth the use on't.
Great Apollo turn all to the best!
These proclamations, so forcing faults upon Hermione,
I little like.
The violent carriage of it
Will clear or end the business: when the oracle,
Thus by Apollo's great divine seal'd up,
Shall the contents discover, something rare
Even then will rush to knowledge. Go: fresh horses!
And gracious be the issue!
(hammering sound)
This sessions, to our great grief we pronounce,
Even pushes 'gainst our heart:
the party tried , The daughter of a king, our wife,
and one of us too much beloved.
Let us be clear'd of being tyrannous,
since we so openly proceed in justice,
which shall have due course,
Even to the guilt or the purgation.
Produce the prisoner.
It is his highness' pleasure that the queen
Appear in person here in court. Silence!
Read the indictment.
Hermione, queen to the worthy Leontes, king of Sicilia,
thou art here accused and arraigned of high treason,
in committing adultery with Polixenes,
king of Bohemia,
and conspiring with Camillo
to take away the life of our sovereign
lord the king, thy royal husband:
the pretence whereof being
by circumstances partly laid open,
thou, Hermione,
contrary to the faith and allegiance of a true subject,
didst counsel and aid them, for their better safety,
to fly away by night.
Since what I am to say must be but that
Which contradicts my accusation
and the testimony on my part no other
But what comes from myself,
it shall scarce boot me
To say 'not guilty:' mine integrity
Being counted falsehood, shall, as I express it,
Be so received. But thus: if powers divine
Behold our human actions, as they do,
I doubt not then but innocence shall make
False accusation blush and tyranny
Tremble at patience.
You, my lord, best know,
Who least will seem to do so, my past life
Hath been as continent, as chaste, as true,
As I am now unhappy;
which is more than history can pattern,
though devised and play'd to take spectators.
For behold me a fellow of the royal bed, which owe
A moiety of the throne a great king's daughter,
The mother to a hopeful prince, here standing
To prate and talk for life and honour
'fore who please to come and hear.
For life, I prize it as I weigh grief,
which I would spare:
for honour,
'Tis a derivative from me to mine,
And only that I stand for.
I appeal to your own conscience, sir,
before Polixenes came to your court,
how I was in your grace,
How merited to be so;
since he came,
With what encounter so uncurrent
I have strain'd to appear thus:
if one jot beyond the bound of honour,
or in act or will
That way inclining, harden'd be the hearts
Of all that hear me, and my near'st of kin
Cry fie upon my grave!
I ne'er heard yet
That any of these bolder vices wanted
Less impudence to gainsay what they did
Than to perform it first.
That's true enough;
Through 'tis a saying, sir, not due to me.
You will not own it.
More than mistress of
Which comes to me in name of fault, I must not
At all acknowledge.
For Polixenes,
With whom I am accused, I do confess
I loved him as in honour he required,
With such a kind of love as might become
A lady like me, with a love even such,
So and no other, as yourself commanded:
Which not to have done I think had been in me
Both disobedience and ingratitude
To you and toward your friend,
whose love had spoke,
Even since it could speak, from an infant, freely
That it was yours.
Now, for conspiracy,
I know not how it tastes; though it be dish'd
For me to try how: all I know of it
Is that Camillo was an honest man;
And why he left your court, the gods themselves,
Wotting no more than I, are ignorant.
You knew of his departure, as you know
What you have underta'en to do in's absence.
Sir,
You speak a language that I understand not:
My life stands in the level of your dreams,
Which I'll lay down.
Your actions are my dreams;
You had a bastard by Polixenes,
And I but dream'd it. As you were past all shame,--
Those of your fact are so--so past all truth:
Which to deny concerns more than avails;
for as thy brat hath been cast out, like to itself,
No father owning it,--which is, indeed,
More criminal in thee than it,
so thou Shalt feel our justice,
in whose easiest passage, look for no less than death.
Sir, spare your threats
The bug which you would fright me with I seek.
To me can life be no commodity:
The crown and comfort of my life, your favour,
I do give lost; for I do feel it gone,
But know not how it went.
My second joy and first-fruits of my body,
from his presence
I am barr'd, like one infectious.
My third comfort starr'd most unluckily,
is from my breast,
The innocent milk in its most innocent mouth,
Haled out to murder:
myself on every post
Proclaimed a strumpet:
with immodest hatred the child-bed privilege denied,
which 'longs to women of all fashion;
lastly, hurried here to this place, i' the open air,
before I have got strength of limit. Now, my liege,
Tell me what blessings I have here alive,
That I should fear to die?
Therefore proceed.
But yet hear this: mistake me not; no life,
I prize it not a straw, but for mine honour,
Which I would free, if I shall be condemn'd
Upon surmises,
all proofs sleeping else but what your jealousies awake,
I tell you 'Tis rigor and not law.
Your honours all,
I do refer me to the oracle:
Apollo be my judge!
This your request
Is altogether just: therefore bring forth,
And in Apollos name, his oracle.
The Emperor of Russia was my father:
O that he were alive,
and here beholding his daughter's trial!
that he did but see the flatness of my misery,
yet with eyes of pity, not revenge!
You here shall swear upon this sword of justice,
That you, Cleomenes and Dion,
have been both at Delphos,
and from thence have brought the seal'd-up oracle,
by the hand deliver'd of great Apollo's priest;
and that, since then,
You have not dared to break the holy seal
Nor read the secrets in't.
All this we swear.
Break off the seals, and read!
Hermione is chaste;
Polixenes blameless; Camillo a true subject;
Leontes a jealous tyrant;
his innocent babe truly begotten;
and the king shall live without an heir,
if that which is lost be not found.
Now blessed be the great Apollo!
Praised!
Hast thou read truth?
Ay, my lord;
even so as it is here set down.
There is no truth at all i' the oracle:
The sessions shall proceed: this is mere falsehood.
My lord the king, the king!
What is the business?
O sir, I shall be hated to report it!
The prince your son, with mere conceit and fear
Of the queen's speed, is gone.
How! gone!
Is dead.
Apollo's angry;
and the heavens themselves do strike at my injustice.
How now there!
This news is mortal to the queen:
look down and see what death is doing.
Take her hence:
Her heart is but o'ercharged; she will recover:
I have too much believed mine own suspicion:
Beseech you,
tenderly apply to her some remedies for life.
Apollo, pardon my great profaneness
gainst thine oracle!
I'll reconcile me to Polixenes,
New woo my queen, recall the good Camillo,
Whom I proclaim a man of truth, of mercy;
For, being transported by my jealousies
To bloody thoughts and to revenge,
I chose Camillo for the minister to poison
My friend Polixenes: which had been done,
But that the good mind of Camillo
tardied my swift command,
though I with death and with reward
did threaten and encourage him,
Not doing 't and being done:
he, most humane and fill'd with honour,
to my kingly guest Unclasp'd my practise,
quit his fortunes here,
Which you knew great, and to the hazard
Of all encertainties himself commended,
No richer than his honour:
how he glisters thorough my rust!
and how his pity does my deeds make the blacker!
Woe the while!
O, cut my lace, lest my heart, cracking it,
Break too.
What fit is this, good lady?
What studied torments, tyrant, hast for me?
What wheels? racks? fires? what flaying? boiling?
In leads or oils?
what old or newer torture m ust I receive,
whose every word deserves to taste of thy most worst?
Thy tyranny together working with thy jealousies,
Fancies too weak for boys, too green and idle
For girls of nine, O, think what they have done
And then run mad indeed, stark mad!
for all thy by-gone fooleries
were but spices of it.
That thou betray'dst Polixenes,'twas nothing;
That did but show thee, of a fool, inconstant
And damnable ingrateful: nor was't much,
Thou wouldst have poison'd good Camillo's honour,
To have him kill a king: poor trespasses,
More monstrous standing by: whereof
I reckon the casting forth to crows thy baby-daughter
To be or none or little; though a devil
Would have shed water out of fire ere done't:
Nor is't directly laid to thee,
the death of the young prince,
whose honourable thoughts,
Thoughts high for one so tender, cleft the heart
That could conceive a gross and foolish sire
Blemish'd his gracious dam: this is not, no,
Laid to thy answer: but the last,
--O lords, When I have said,
cry 'woe!' the queen, the queen,
The sweet'st, dear'st creature's dead,
and vengeance for't not dropp'd down yet.
The higher powers forbid!
I say she's dead; I'll swear't.
If word nor oath prevail not, go and see:
if you can bring tincture or lustre in her lip, her eye,
Heat outwardly or breath within, I'll serve you
As I would do the gods. But, O thou tyrant!
Do not repent these things, for they are heavier
Than all thy woes can stir; therefore betake thee
To nothing but despair. A thousand knees
Ten thousand years together, naked, fasting,
Upon a barren mountain and still winter
In storm perpetual, could not move the gods
To look that way thou wert.
Go on, go on
Thou canst not speak too much; I have deserved
All tongues to talk their bitterest.
Say no more:
Howe'er the business goes, you have made fault
I' the boldness of your speech.
I am sorry for't:
All faults I make, when I shall come to know them,
I do repent. Alas! I have show'd too much
The rashness of a woman: he is touch'd
To the noble heart.
What's gone and what's past help
Should be past grief: do not receive affliction
At my petition; I beseech you, rather
Let me be punish'd, that have minded you
Of what you should forget. Now, good my liege
Sir, royal sir, forgive a foolish woman:
The love I bore your queen--lo, fool again!--
I'll speak of her no more, nor of your children;
I'll not remember you of my own lord,
Who is lost too: take your patience to you,
And I'll say nothing.
Thou didst speak but well when most the truth;
which I receive much better Tthan to be pitied of thee.
Prithee, bring me to the dead bodies of my queen and son:
One grave shall be for both:
upon them shall the causes of their death appear,
unto our shame perpetual.
Once a day I'll visit the chapel where they lie,
and tears shed there shall be my recreation:
so long as nature will bear up with this exercise,
so long I daily vow to use it.
Come and lead me unto these sorrows.
Thou art perfect then,
our ship hath touch'd upon the deserts of Bohemia?
Ay, my lord: and fear
We have landed in ill time:
the skies look grimly and threaten present blusters.
In my conscience,
The heavens with that we have in hand are angry
And frown upon 's.
Their sacred wills be done! Go, get aboard;
Look to thy bark:
I'll not be long before I call upon thee.
Make your best haste,
and go not too far i' the land:
'tis like to be loud weather;
Besides, this place is famous for the creatures
Of prey that keep upon't.
Go thou away:
I'll follow instantly.
I am glad at heart
To be so rid o' the business.
Come, poor babe:
I have heard, but not believed,
the spirits o' the dead may walk again:
if such thing be,
thy mother appear'd to me last night,
for ne'er was dream so like a waking.
To me comes a creature,
Sometimes her head on one side, some another;
I never saw a vessel of like sorrow,
So fill'd and so becoming: in pure white robes,
Like very sanctity,
she did approach my cabin where I lay;
thrice bow'd before me,
And gasping to begin some speech,
her eyes became two spouts: the fury spent,
anon did this break-from her:
'Good Antigonus,
Since fate, against thy better disposition,
Hath made thy person for the thrower-out
Of my poor babe, according to thine oath,
Places remote enough are in Bohemia,
There weep and leave it crying;
and, for the babe os counted lost for ever,
Perdita, I prithee, call't.
For this ungentle business put on thee by my lord,
thou ne'er shalt see thy wife Paulina more.'
And so, with shrieks she melted into air.
Affrighted much, I did in time collect myself
and thought this was so and no slumber.
Dreams are toys:
Yet for this once, yea, superstitiously,
I will be squared by this.
I do believe Hermione hath suffer'd death,
and that Apollo would, this being indeed
the issue of King Polixenes,
it should here be laid,
Either for life or death, upon the earth
Of its right father. Blossom, speed thee well!
There lie, and there thy character: there these;
Which may, if fortune please, both breed thee, pretty,
And still rest thine.
The storm begins; poor wretch,
That for thy mother's fault art thus exposed
To loss and what may follow! Weep I cannot,
But my heart bleeds;
and most accursed am I to be by oath enjoin'd to this.
Farewell!
The day frowns more and more:
thou'rt like to have a lullaby too rough:
I never saw the heavens so dim by day. A savage clamour!
Well may I get aboard!
This is the chase:
I am gone for ever.
I would there were no age
between ten and three-and-twenty,
or that youth would sleep out the rest;
for there is nothing in the between
but getting wenches with child,
wronging the ancientry,
stealing, fighting--Hark you now!
Would any but these boiled brains of nineteen
and two-and-twenty hunt this weather?
They have scared away two of my best sheep,
which I fear the wolf will sooner find than the master:
if any where I have them,
'tis by the seaside, browsing of ivy.
Good luck, an't be thy will what have we here!
Mercy on 's, a barne a very pretty barne!
A boy or a child, I wonder?
A pretty one; a very pretty one: sure, some 'scape:
though I am not bookish,
yet I can read waiting-gentlewoman  in the 'scape.
This has been some stair-work, some trunk-work,
some behind-door-work:
they were warmer that got this than the poor thing is here.
I'll take it up for pity:
yet I'll tarry till my son come;
he hallooed but even now.
Hilloa, loa!
What, art so near?
If thou'lt see a thing to talk on
when thou art dead and rotten, come hither.
What ailest thou, man?
I have seen two such sights, by sea and by land!
but I am not to say it is a sea,
for it is now the sky:
betwixt the firmament and it you cannot thrust a bodkin's point.
Why, boy, how is it?
I would you did but see how it chafes, how it rages,
how it takes up the shore! but that's not the point.
O, the most piteous cry of the poor souls!
sometimes to see 'em, and not to see 'em;
now the ship boring the moon with her main-mast,
and anon swallowed with yest and froth,
as you'ld thrust a cork into a hogshead.
And then for the land-service,
to see how the bear tore out his shoulder-bone;
how he cried to me for help
and said his name was Antigonus, a nobleman.
But to make an end of the ship,
to see how the sea flap-dragoned it:
but, first, how the poor souls roared,
and the sea mocked them;
and how the poor gentleman roared
and the bear mocked him,
both roaring louder than the sea or weather.
Name of mercy, when was this, boy?
Now, now:
I have not winked since I saw these sights:
the men are not yet cold under water,
nor the bear half dined on the gentleman:
he's at it now.
Would I had been by, to have helped the old man!
I would you had been by the ship side,
to have helped her:
there your charity would have lacked footing.
Heavy matters! heavy matters!
but look thee here, boy.
Now bless thyself: thou mettest with things dying,
I with things newborn. Here's a sight for thee;
look thee, a bearing-cloth for a squire's child!
look thee here; take up, take up, boy;
open't. So, let's see:
it was told me I should be rich by the fairies.
This is some changeling: open't. What's within, boy?
You're a made old man:
if the sins of your youth are forgiven you,
you're well to live.
Gold! all gold!
This is fairy gold, boy, and 'twill prove so:
up with't, keep it close: home, home, the next way.
We are lucky, boy;
and to be so still requires nothing but secrecy.
Let my sheep go: come, good boy,
the next way home.
Go you the next way with your findings.
I'll go see if the bear be gone from the gentleman
and how much he hath eaten: they are never curst
but when they are hungry:
if there be any of him left,
I'll bury it.
That's a good deed.
If thou mayest discern by that which is left of him
what he is,
fetch me to the sight of him.
Marry, will I; and you shall help
to put him i' the ground.
'Tis a lucky day, boy, and we'll do good deeds on't.
I, that please some, try all, both joy and terror
Of good and bad, that makes and unfolds error,
Now take upon me, in the name of Time,
To use my wings. Impute it not a crime
To me or my swift passage, that I slide
O'er sixteen years and leave the growth untried
Of that wide gap, since it is in my power
To o'erthrow law and in one self-born hour
To plant and o'erwhelm custom.
Let me pass the same I am,
ere ancient'st order was
Or what is now received:
I witness to the times that brought them in;
so shall I do to the freshest things now reigning
and make stale the glistering of this present,
as my tale now seems to it.
Your patience this allowing,
I turn my glass and give my scene such growing
As you had slept between:
Leontes leaving,
The effects of his fond jealousies so grieving
That he shuts up himself, imagine me,
Gentle spectators,
that I now may be in fair Bohemia,
and remember well,
I mentioned a son o' the king's, which Florizel
I now name to you; and with speed so pace
To speak of Perdita, now grown in grace
Equal with wondering: what of her ensues
I list not prophecy; but let Time's news
Be known when 'tis brought forth.
A shepherd's daughter,
And what to her adheres, which follows after,
Is the argument of Time.
Of this allow,
If ever you have spent time worse ere now;
If never, yet that Time himself doth say
He wishes earnestly you never may.
I pray thee, good Camillo, be no more importunate:
'tis a sickness denying thee any thing;
a death to grant this.
It is fifteen years since I saw my country:
though I have for the most part been aired abroad,
I desire to lay my bones there.
Besides, the penitent king, my master,
hath sent for me;
to whose feeling sorrows I might be some allay,
or I o'erween to think so,
which is another spur to my departure.
As thou lovest me, Camillo,
wipe not out the rest of thy services by leaving me now:
the need I have of thee thine own goodness hath made;
better not to have had thee than thus to want thee:
thou, having made me businesses
which none without thee
can sufficiently manage,
must either stay to execute them thyself
or take away with thee the very services thou hast done;
Of that fatal country, Sicilia,
prithee speak no more;
whose very naming punishes me with the remembrance
of that penitent, as thou callest him,
and reconciled king, my brother;
whose loss of his most precious queen and children
are even now to be afresh lamented.
Say to me, when sawest thou the Prince Florizel, my son?
Kings are no less unhappy, their issue not being gracious,
than they are in losing them
when they have approved their virtues.
Sir, it is three days since I saw the prince.
What his happier affairs may be, are to me unknown:
but I have missingly noted, he is of late much retired
from court and is less frequent
to his princely exercises
than formerly he hath appeared.
I have considered so much, Camillo,
and with some care;
so far that I have eyes under my service
which look upon his removedness;
from whom I have this intelligence,
that he is seldom from the house
of a most homely shepherd;
a man, they say, that from very nothing,
and beyond the imagination of his neighbours,
is grown into an unspeakable estate.
I have heard, sir, of such a man,
who hath a daughter of most rare note:
the report of her is extended more
than can be thought to begin from such a cottage.
That's likewise part of my intelligence;
but, I fear, the angle that plucks our son thither.
Thou shalt accompany us to the place; where we will,
not appearing what we are,
have some question with the shepherd;
from whose simplicity I think it not hard
to get the cause of my son's resort thither.
Prithee, be my present partner in this business,
and lay aside the thoughts of Sicilia.
I willingly obey your command.
My best Camillo! We must disguise ourselves.
When daffodils begin to peer,
With heigh! the doxy over the dale,
Why, then comes in the sweet o' the year;
For the red blood reigns in the winter's pale.
The white sheet bleaching on the hedge,
With heigh! the sweet birds, O, how they sing!
Doth set my pugging tooth on edge;
For a quart of ale is a dish for a king.
The lark, that tirra-lyra chants,
With heigh! with heigh! the thrush and the jay,
Are summer songs for me and my aunts,
While we lie tumbling in the hay.
I have served Prince Florizel and in my time
wore three-pile; but now I am out of service:
But shall I go mourn for that, my dear?
The pale moon shines by night:
And when I wander here and there,
I then do most go right.
If tinkers may have leave to live,
And bear the sow-skin budget,
Then my account I well may, give,
And in the stocks avouch it.
My traffic is sheets; when the kite builds,
look to lesser linen.
My father named me Autolycus;
who being, as I am,
littered under Mercury,
was likewise a snapper-up of unconsidered trifles.
With die and drab I purchased this caparison,
and my revenue is the silly cheat.
Gallows and knock are too powerfulon the highway:
beating and hanging are terrors to me:
for the life to come, I sleep out the thought of it.
A prize! a prize!
Let me see: every 'leven wether tods;
every tod yields pound and odd shilling;
fifteen hundred shorn. what comes the wool to?
If the springe hold, the cock's mine.
I cannot do't without counters. Let me see;
what am I to buy for our sheep-shearing feast?
Three pound of sugar, five pound of currants, rice,
what will this sister of mine do with rice?
But my father hath made her mistress of the feast,
and she lays it on.
She hath made me four and twenty nose-gays
for the shearers,
three-man-song-men all,
and very good ones;
but they are most of them means and bases;
but one puritan amongst them,
and he sings psalms to horn-pipes.
I must have saffron
to colour the warden pies; mace; dates?
none, that's out of my note; nutmegs, seven;
a race or two of ginger,
but that I may beg; four pound of prunes,
and as many of raisins o' the sun.
O that ever I was born!
I' the name of me--
O, help me, help me! pluck but off these rags;
and then, death, death!
Alack, poor soul! thou hast need of more rags
to lay on thee, rather than have these off.
O sir, the loathsomeness of them offends me more
than the stripes I have received,
which are mighty ones and millions.
Alas, poor man! a million of beating
may come to a great matter.
I am robbed, sir, and beaten;
my money and apparel ta'en from me,
and these detestable things put upon me.
What, by a horseman, or a footman?
A footman, sweet sir, a footman.
Indeed, he should be a footman
by the garments he has left with thee:
if this be a horseman's coat,
it hath seen very hot service.
Lend me thy hand, I'll help thee:
come, lend me thy hand.
O, good sir, tenderly, O!
Alas, poor soul!
O, good sir, softly, good sir!
I fear, sir, my shoulder-blade is out.
How now! canst stand?
Softly, dear sir; good sir, softly.
You ha' done me a charitable office.
Dost lack any money?
I have a little money for thee.
No, good sweet sir; no, I beseech you, sir:
I have a kinsman not past
three quarters of a mile hence,
unto whom I was going;
I shall there have money, or any thing I want:
offer me no money, I pray you;
that kills my heart.
What manner of fellow was he that robbed you?
A fellow, sir,
that I have known to go about with troll-my-dames;
I knew him once a servant of the prince:
I cannot tell, good sir, for which of his virtues it was,
but he was certainly whipped out of the court.
His vices, you would say;
there's no virtue whipped out of the court:
they cherish it to make it stay there;
and yet it will no more but abide.
Vices, I would say, sir. I know this man well:
he hath been since an ape-bearer;
then a process-server, a bailiff;
then he compassed a motion of the Prodigal Son,
and married a tinker's wife within a mile
where my land and living lies;
and, having flown over many knavish professions,
he settled only in rogue: some call him Autolycus.
Out upon him! prig, for my life, prig:
he haunts wakes, fairs and bear-baitings.
Very true, sir; he, sir, he;
that's the rogue that put me into this apparel.
Not a more cowardly rogue in all Bohemia:
if you had but looked big and spit at him, he'ld have run.
I must confess to you, sir, I am no fighter:
I am false of heart that way; and that he knew,
I warrant him.
How do you now?
Sweet sir, much better than I was;
I can stand and walk:
I will even take my leave of you,
and pace softly towards my kinsman's.
Shall I bring thee on the way?
No, good-faced sir; no, sweet sir.
Then fare thee well:
I must go buy spices for our sheep-shearing.
Prosper you, sweet sir!
Your purse is not hot enough to purchase your spice.
I'll be with you at your sheep-shearing too:
if I make not this cheat bring out another
and the shearers prove sheep,
let me be unrolled and my name put in the book of virtue!
Jog on, jog on, the foot-path way,
And merrily hent the stile-a:
A merry heart goes all the day,
Your sad tires in a mile-a.
These your unusual weeds
to each part of you do give a life:
no shepherdess, but Flora Peering in April's front.
This your sheep-shearing is as a meeting
of the petty gods,
And you the queen on't.
Sir, my gracious lord,
To chide at your extremes it not becomes me:
O, pardon, that I name them! Your high self,
The gracious mark o' the land,
you have obscured with a swain's wearing,
and me, poor lowly maid,
Most goddess-like prank'd up:
but that our feasts
In every mess have folly and the feeders
Digest it with a custom,
I should blush to see you so attired,
sworn, I think, to show myself a glass.
I bless the time
When my good falcon made her flight
across thy father's ground.
Now Jove afford you cause!
To me the difference forges dread;
your greatness hath not been used to fear.
Even now I tremble to think your father,
by some accident,
Should pass this way as you did: O, the Fates!
How would he look,
to see his work so noble vilely bound up?
What would he say? Or how should I,
in these my borrow'd flaunts,
behold the sternness of his presence?
Apprehend nothing but jollity.
The gods themselves, Humbling their deities to love,
have taken the shapes of beasts upon them:
Jupiter became a bull, and bellow'd;
the green Neptune a ram, and bleated;
and the fire-robed god, Golden Apollo,
a poor humble swain,
As I seem now.
Their transformations were never
for a piece of beauty rarer,
Nor in a way so chaste,
since my desires run not before mine honour,
nor my lusts burn hotter than my faith.
O, but, sir,
Your resolution cannot hold,
when 'tis opposed, as it must be,
by the power of the king:
One of these two must be necessities,
Which then will speak,
that you must change this purpose,
Or I my life.
Thou dearest Perdita,
With these forced thoughts, I prithee,
darken not the mirth o' the feast.
Or I'll be thine, my fair,
Or not my father's.
For I cannot be mine own, nor any thing to any,
if I be not thine. To this I am most constant,
Though destiny say no. Be merry, gentle;
Strangle such thoughts as these with any thing
That you behold the while. Your guests are coming:
Lift up your countenance,
as it were the day of celebration of that nuptial
which we two have sworn shall come.
O lady Fortune, Stand you auspicious!
See, your guests approach:
Address yourself to entertain them sprightly,
And let's be red with mirth.
Fie, daughter! when my old wife lived,
upon this day she was both pantler, butler, cook,
Both dame and servant; welcomed all, served all;
Would sing her song and dance her turn; now here,
At upper end o' the table, now i' the middle;
On his shoulder, and his; her face o' fire
With labour and the thing she took to quench it,
She would to each one sip. You are retired,
As if you were a feasted one
and not the hostess of the meeting:
pray you, bid these unknown friends to's welcome;
for it is a way to make us better friends, more known.
Come, quench your blushes and present yourself
That which you are, mistress o' the feast: come on,
And bid us welcome to your sheep-shearing,
As your good flock shall prosper.
Sir, welcome:
It is my father's will
I should take on me the hostess-ship o' the day.
You're welcome, sir.
Give me those flowers there, Dorcas.
Reverend sirs,
For you there's rosemary and rue;
these keep seeming and savour all the winter long:
Grace and remembrance be to you both,
And welcome to our shearing!
Shepherdess, A fair one are you-
-well you fit our ages with flowers of winter.
Sir, the year growing ancient,
Not yet on summer's death,
nor on the birth of trembling winter,
the fairest flowers o' the season
Are our carnations and streak'd gillyvors
Which some call nature's bastards:
of that kind our rustic garden's barren;
and I care not to get slips of them.
Wherefore, gentle maiden,
Do you neglect them?
For I have heard it said
There is an art which in their piedness
shares with great creating nature.
Say there be;
Yet nature is made better by no mean
But nature makes that mean:
so, over that art which you say adds to nature,
is an art that nature makes.
You see, sweet maid,
we marry a gentler scion to the wildest stock,
And make conceive a bark of baser kind
By bud of nobler race:
this is an art which does mend nature,
change it rather, but the art itself is nature.
So it is.
Then make your garden rich in gillyvors,
And do not call them bastards.
I'll not put the dibble in earth
to set one slip of them;
No more than were I painted
I would wish this youth should say
'twere well and only therefore desire to breed by me.
Here's flowers for you;
Hot lavender, mints, savoury, marjoram;
The marigold, that goes to bed wi' the sun
And with him rises weeping:
these are flowers of middle summer,
and I think they are given to men of middle age.
You're very welcome.
I should leave grazing, were I of your flock,
And only live by gazing.
Out, alas!
You'd be so lean, that blasts of January
Would blow you through and through.
Now, my fair'st friend,
I would I had some flowers o' the spring that might
Become your time of day; and yours, and yours,
That wear upon your virgin branches yet
Your maidenheads growing: O Proserpina,
For the flowers now, that frighted thou let'st fall
From Dis's waggon! daffodils,
That come before the swallow dares, and take
The winds of March with beauty; violets dim,
But sweeter than the lids of Juno's eyes
Or Cytherea's breath; pale primroses
That die unmarried, ere they can behold
Bight Phoebus in his strength--a malady
Most incident to maids; bold oxlips and
The crown imperial; lilies of all kinds,
The flower-de-luce being one! O, these I lack,
To make you garlands of, and my sweet friend,
To strew him o'er and o'er!
What, like a corse?
No, like a bank for love to lie and play on;
Not like a corse; or if, not to be buried,
But quick and in mine arms. Come, take your flowers:
Methinks I play as I have seen them do
In Whitsun pastorals:
sure this robe of mine does change my disposition.
What you do
Still betters what is done. When you speak, sweet.
I'ld have you do it ever: when you sing,
I'ld have you buy and sell so, so give alms,
Pray so; and, for the ordering your affairs,
To sing them too: when you do dance,
I wish you a wave o' the sea, that you might
ever do nothing but that; move still, still so,
And own no other function: each your doing,
So singular in each particular,
Crowns what you are doing in the present deed,
That all your acts are queens.
O Doricles,
Your praises are too large: but that your youth,
And the true blood which peepeth fairly through't,
Do plainly give you out an unstain'd shepherd,
With wisdom I might fear, my Doricles,
You woo'd me the false way.
I think you have as little skill
to fear as I have purpose to put you to't.
But come; our dance, I pray:
Your hand, my Perdita: so turtles pair,
That never mean to part.
I'll swear for 'em.
This is the prettiest low-born lass that ever
Ran on the green-sward: nothing she does or seems
But smacks of something greater than herself,
Too noble for this place.
He tells her something
That makes her blood look out: good sooth,
she is the queen of curds and cream.
Come on, strike up!
Mopsa must be your mistress:
marry, garlic, to mend her kissing with!
Now, in good time!
Not a word, a word; we stand upon our manners.
Come, strike up!
(a flute plays)
Pray, good shepherd, what fair swain is this
Which dances with your daughter?
They call him Doricles; and boasts himself
To have a worthy feeding: but I have it
Upon his own report and I believe it;
He looks like sooth. He says he loves my daughter:
I think so too; for never gazed the moon
Upon the water as he'll stand and read
As 'twere my daughter's eyes: and, to be plain.
I think there is not half a kiss to choose
Who loves another best.
She dances featly.
So she does any thing; though I report it,
That should be silent: if young Doricles
Do light upon her, she shall bring him that
Which he not dreams of.
O master, if you did but hear the pedlar at the door,
you would never dance again after a tabour and pipe;
no, the bagpipe could not move you:
he sings several tunes faster than you'll tell money;
he utters them as he had eaten ballads
and all men's ears grew to his tunes.
He could never come better; he shall come in.
I love a ballad but even too well,
if it be doleful matter merrily set down,
or a very pleasant thing indeed and sung lamentably.
He hath songs for man or woman, of all sizes;
no milliner can so fit his customers with gloves:
he has the prettiest love-songs for maids;
so without bawdry, which is strange;
with such delicate burthens of dildos and fadings,
'jump her and thump her;'
and where some stretch-mouthed rascal would,
as it were,
mean mischief and break a foul gap into the matter,
he makes the maid to answer '
Whoop, do me no harm, good man;'
puts him off, slights him,
with 'Whoop, do me no harm, good man.'
This is a brave fellow.
Believe me, thou talkest
of an admirable conceited fellow.
Has he any unbraided wares?
He hath ribbons of an the colours i' the rainbow;
points more than all the lawyers in Bohemia
can learnedly handle, though they come
to him by the gross:
inkles, caddisses, cambrics, lawns:
why, he sings 'em over as they were gods or goddesses;
you would think a smock were a she-angel,
he so chants to the sleeve-hand
and the work about the square on't.
Prithee bring him in; and let him approach singing.
Forewarn him that he use no scurrilous words in 's tunes.
You have of these pedlars,
that have more in them than you'ld think, sister.
Ay, good brother, or go about to think.
Lawn as white as driven snow;
Cyprus black as e'er was crow;
Gloves as sweet as damask roses;
Masks for faces and for noses;
Bugle bracelet, necklace amber,
Perfume for a lady's chamber;
Golden quoifs and stomachers,
For my lads to give their dears:
Pins and poking-sticks of steel,
What maids lack from head to heel:
Come buy of me, come; come buy, come buy;
Buy lads, or else your lasses cry: Come buy.
If I were not in love with Mopsa,
thou shouldst take no money of me;
but being enthralled as I am,
it will also be the bondage
of certain ribbons and gloves.
I was promised them against the feast;
but they come not too late now.
He hath promised you more than that, or there be liars.
He hath paid you all he promised you;
may be, he has paid you more,
which will shame you to give him again.
Is there no manners left among maids?
will they wear their plackets
where they should bear their faces?
Is there not milking-time, when you are going to bed,
or kiln-hole, to whistle off these secrets,
but you must be tittle-tattling
before all our guests?
'tis well they are whispering:
clamour your tongues,
and not a word more.
I have done.
Come, you promised me a tawdry-lace
and a pair of sweet gloves.
Have I not told thee how I was cozened by the way
and lost all my money?
And indeed, sir, there are cozeners abroad;
therefore it behoves men to be wary.
Fear not thou, man, thou shalt lose nothing here.
I hope so, sir;
for I have about me many parcels of charge.
What hast here? ballads?
Pray now, buy some: I love a ballad in print o' life,
for then we are sure they are true.
Here's one to a very doleful tune,
how a usurer's wife was brought to bed of twenty money-bags
at a burthen
and how she longed to eat adders' heads
and toads carbonadoed.
Is it true, think you?
Very true, and but a month old.
Bless me from marrying a usurer!
Here's the midwife's name to't,
one Mistress tale-porter,
and five or six honest wives that were present.
Why should I carry lies abroad?
Pray you now, buy it.
Come on, lay it by:
and let's first see moe ballads;
we'll buy the other things anon.
Here's another ballad of a fish,
that appeared upon the coast
on Wednesday the four-score of April,
forty thousand fathom above water,
and sung this ballad against the hard hearts of maids:
it was thought she was a woman
and was turned into a cold fish
for she would not exchange flesh
with one that loved her:
the ballad is very pitiful and as true.
Is it true too, think you?
Five justices' hands at it,
and witnesses more than my pack will hold.
Lay it by too: another.
This is a merry ballad, but a very pretty one.
Let's have some merry ones.
Why, this is a passing merry one
and goes to the tune of 'Two maids wooing a man:'
there's scarce a maid westward but she sings it,
'tis in request, I can tell you.
We can both sing it:
if thou'lt bear a part, thou shalt hear;
'tis in three parts.
We had the tune on't a month ago.
I can bear my part;
you must know 'tis my occupation;
have at it with you.
(flute and drums play)
Get you hence, for I must go
Where it fits not you to know.
Whither?
O, whither?
It becomes thy oath full well,
Thou to me thy secrets tell.
Me too, let me go thither.
Or thou goest to the orange or mill.
If to either, thou dost ill.
Neither.
What, neither?
Thou hast sworn my love to be.
Thou hast sworn it more to me:
Then whither goest? say, whither?
We'll have this song out anon by ourselves:
my father and the gentlemen are in sad talk,
and we'll not trouble them.
Come, bring away thy pack after me.
Wenches, I'll buy for you both.
Pedlar, let's have the first choice.
Follow me, girls.
And you shall pay well for 'em.
Will you buy any tape,
Or lace for your cape,
My dainty duck, my dear-a?
Any silk, any thread,
Any toys for your head,
Of the new'st and finest, finest wear-a?
Come to the pedlar;
Money's a medler.
That doth utter all men's ware-a.
Is it not too far gone? 'Tis time to part them.
r shepherd!
Your heart is full of something that does
take Your mind from feasting.
Sooth, when I was young and handed love as you do,
I was wont to load my she with knacks:
I would have ransack'd the pedlar's silken treasury
and have pour'd it to her acceptance;
you have let him go and nothing marted with him.
If your lass Interpretation should abuse
and call this your lack of love or bounty,
you were straited for a reply,
at least if you make a care of happy holding her.
Old sir,
I know she prizes not such trifles as these are:
The gifts she looks from me are pack'd
and lock'd up in my heart;
which I have given already,
But not deliver'd.
O, hear me breathe my life before this ancient sir,
who, it should seem, hath sometime loved!
I take thy hand, this hand,
As soft as dove's down and as white as it,
Or Ethiopian's tooth,
or the fann'd snow that's bolted
By the northern blasts twice o'er.
What follows this?
How prettily the young swain seems to wash
The hand was fair before! I have put you out:
But to your protestation;
let me hear what you profess.
Do, and be witness to 't.
And this my neighbour too?
And he, and more than he,
and men, the earth, the heavens, and all:
That, were I crown'd the most imperial monarch,
Thereof most worthy,
were I the fairest youth
That ever made eye swerve,
had force and knowledge
More than was ever man's,
I would not prize them without her love;
for her employ them all;
Commend them and condemn them to her service
or to their own perdition.
Fairly offer'd.
This shows a sound affection.
But, my daughter, Say you the like to him?
I cannot speak so well,
nothing so well; no, nor mean better:
By the pattern of mine own thoughts
I cut out the purity of his.
Take hands, a bargain!
And, friends unknown, you shall bear witness to 't:
I give my daughter to him,
and will make her portion equal his.
O, that must be I' the virtue of your daughter:
one being dead,
I shall have more than you can dream of yet;
Enough then for your wonder. But, come on,
Contract us 'fore these witnesses.
Come, your hand;
And, daughter, yours.
Soft, swain, awhile, beseech you;
Have you a father?
I have: but what of him?
Knows he of this?
He neither does nor shall.
You offer him, if this be so,
a wrong something unfilial:
reason my son should choose himself a wife,
but as good reason the father,
all whose joy is nothing else but fair posterity,
should hold some counsel in such a business.
I yield all this;
But for some other reasons, my grave sir,
Which 'tis not fit you know,
I not acquaint my father of this business.
Let him know't.
He shall not.
Prithee, let him.
No, he must not.
Let him, my son:
he shall not need to grieve at knowing of thy choice.
Come, come, he must not.
Mark our contract.
Mark your divorce, young sir,
Discovering himself whom son I dare not call;
thou art too base to be acknowledged:
thou a sceptre's heir,
That thus affect'st a sheep-hook!
Thou old traitor,
I am sorry that by hanging thee
I can but shorten thy life one week.
And thou, fresh piece of excellent witchcraft,
who of force must know the royal fool
thou copest with,--
O, my heart!
I'll have thy beauty scratch'd with briers,
and made more homely than thy state.
For thee, fond boy,
if I may ever know thou dost but sigh
That thou no more shalt see this knack,
as never I mean thou shalt,
we'll bar thee from succession;
Not hold thee of our blood, no, not our kin,
Far than Deucalion off: mark thou my words:
Follow us to the court. Thou churl, for this time,
Though full of our displeasure,
yet we free thee from the dead blow of it.
And you, enchantment.
Worthy enough a herdsman: yea, him too,
That makes himself, but for our honour therein,
Unworthy thee,
if ever henceforth thou these rural latches
to his entrance open,
Or hoop his body more with thy embraces,
I will devise a death as cruel for thee
As thou art tender to't.
Even here undone!
I was not much afeard;
for once or twice I was about to speak
and tell him plainly,
The selfsame sun that shines upon his court
Hides not his visage from our cottage
but looks on alike. Will't please you, sir, be gone?
I told you what would come of this: beseech you,
Of your own state take care: this dream of mine,--
Being now awake, I'll queen it no inch farther,
But milk my ewes and weep.
Why, how now, father!
Speak ere thou diest.
I cannot speak,
nor think nor dare to know that which I know. O sir!
You have undone a man of fourscore three,
That thought to fill his grave in quiet, yea,
To die upon the bed my father died,
To lie close by his honest bones:
but now some hangman must put on my shroud
and lay me where no priest shovels in dust.
O cursed wretch,
That knew'st this was the prince,
and wouldst adventure to mingle faith with him!
Undone! undone!
If I might die within this hour,
I have lived to die when I desire.
Why look you so upon me?
I am but sorry, not afeard; delay'd,
But nothing alter'd: what I was, I am;
More straining on for plucking back,
not following my leash unwillingly.
Gracious my lord,
You know your father's temper:
at this time he will allow no speech,
which I do guess you do not purpose to him;
and as hardly will he endure your sight as yet, I fear:
Then, till the fury of his highness settle,
Come not before him.
I not purpose it.
I think, Camillo?
Even he, my lord.
How often have I told you 'twould be thus!
How often said,
my dignity would last but till 'twere known!
It cannot fail but by the violation of my faith;
and then let nature crush the sides o' the earth together
And mar the seeds within! Lift up thy looks:
From my succession wipe me, father;
I am heir to my affection.
Be advised.
I am, and by my fancy:
if my reason will thereto be obedient,
I have reason;
If not, my senses, better pleased with madness,
Do bid it welcome.
This is desperate, sir.
So call it: but it does fulfil my vow;
I needs must think it honesty.
Camillo, not for Bohemia,
nor the pomp that may be thereat glean'd,
for all the sun sees or the close earth wombs
or the profound sea hides in unknown fathoms,
will I break my oath yo this my fair beloved:
therefore, I pray you,
As you have ever been my father's honour'd friend,
When he shall miss me,
as, in faith, I mean not to see him any more,
cast your good counsels upon his passion;
let myself and fortune tug for the time to come.
This you may know and so deliver,
I am put to sea with her
whom here I cannot hold on shore;
And most opportune to our need
I have Aa vessel rides fast by,
but not prepared for this design.
What course I mean to hold
shall nothing benefit your knowledge,
nor concern me the reporting.
O my lord!
I would your spirit were easier for advice,
Or stronger for your need.
Hark, Perdita
I'll hear you by and by.
He's irremoveable,
Resolved for flight.
Now were I happy,
if his going I could frame to serve my turn,
Save him from danger, do him love and honour,
Purchase the sight again of dear Sicilia
And that unhappy king, my master,
whom I so much thirst to see.
Now, good Camillo;
I am so fraught with curious business
that I leave out ceremony.
Sir,
I think you have heard of my poor services,
i' the love that I have borne your father?
Very nobly have you deserved:
it is my father's music to speak your deeds,
not little of his care to have them recompensed
as thought on.
Well, my lord,
If you may please to think I love the king
And through him what is nearest to him,
which is your gracious self,
embrace but my direction:
If your more ponderous and settled project
May suffer alteration, on mine honour,
I'll point you where you shall have such receiving
As shall become your highness;
where you may enjoy your mistress,
from the whom, I see,
There's no disjunction to be made,
but by-- As heavens forefend!
--your ruin; marry her,
And, with my best endeavours in your absence,
Your discontenting father strive to qualify
And bring him up to liking.
How, Camillo,
May this, almost a miracle, be done?
That I may call thee something more than man
And after that trust to thee.
Have you thought on a place whereto you'll go?
Not any yet:
But as the unthought-
on accident is guilty to what we wildly do,
so we profess ourselves to be the slaves of chance
and flies of every wind that blows.
Then list to me:
This follows,
if you will not change your purpose
but undergo this flight,
make for Sicilia, and there present yourself
and your fair princess,
For so I see she must be, 'fore Leontes:
She shall be habited as it becomes
The partner of your bed.
Methinks I see Leontes
opening his free arms and weeping
His welcomes forth;
asks thee the son forgiveness,
As 'twere i' the father's person;
kisses the hands of your fresh princess;
o'er and o'er divides him
'Twixt his unkindness and his kindness;
the one he chides to hell
and bids the other grow faster than thought or time.
Worthy Camillo,
What colour for my visitation
shall I hold up before him?
Sent by the king your father
To greet him and to give him comforts.
Sir, the manner of your bearing towards him,
with what you as from your father shall deliver,
Things known betwixt us three,
I'll write you down:
The which shall point you forth at every sitting
What you must say;
that he shall not perceive
but that you have your father's bosom there
And speak his very heart.
I am bound to you:
There is some sap in this.
A cause more promising
than a wild dedication of yourselves
To unpath'd waters, undream'd shores,
besides you know
prosperity's the very bond of love,
Whose fresh complexion
and whose heart together affliction alters.
One of these is true:
I think affliction may subdue the cheek,
But not take in the mind.
Yea, say you so?
There shall not at your father's house
these seven years
Be born another such.
My good Camillo,
She is as forward of her breeding
as she is i' the rear our birth.
I cannot say 'tis pity
She lacks instructions,
for she seems a mistress to most that teach.
Your pardon, sir;
for this I'll blush you thanks.
My prettiest Perdita!
But O, the thorns we stand upon! Camillo,
Preserver of my father, now of me,
The medicine of our house, how shall we do?
We are not furnish'd like Bohemia's son,
Nor shall appear in Sicilia.
My lord,
Fear none of this:
I think you know my fortunes do all lie there:
it shall be so my care to have you royally appointed
as if the scene you play were mine.
For instance, sir,
That you may know you shall not want, one word.
Ha, ha! what a fool Honesty is!
and Trust, his sworn brother,
a very simple gentleman!
I have sold all my trumpery;
not a counterfeit stone,
not a ribbon, glass, pomander, brooch,
table-book, ballad,
knife, tape, glove,
shoe-tie, bracelet, horn-ring,
to keep my pack from fasting:
they throng who should buy first,
as if my trinkets had been hallowed
and brought a benediction to the buyer:
by which means I saw whose purse was best in picture;
and what I saw, to my good use I remembered.
My clown, who wants but something
to be a reasonable man,
grew so in love with the wenches' song,
that he would not stir his pettitoes
till he had both tune and words;
which so drew the rest of the herd to me
that all their other senses stuck in ears:
you might have pinched a placket,
it was senseless;
'twas nothing to geld a codpiece of a purse;
I could have filed keys off that hung in chains:
no hearing, no feeling, but my sir's song,
and admiring the nothing of it.
So that in this time of lethargy
I picked and cut most of their festival purses;
and had not the old man come in with a whoo-bub
against his daughter and the king's son
and scared my choughs from the chaff,
I had not left a purse alive in the whole army.
Nay, but my letters,
by this means being there so soon as you arrive,
shall clear that doubt.
And those that you'll procure
from King Leontes--
Shall satisfy your father.
Happy be you!
All that you speak shows fair.
Who have we here?
We'll make an instrument of this,
omit nothing may give us aid.
If they have overheard me now, why, hanging.
How now, good fellow! why shakest thou so?
Fear not, man; here's no harm intended to thee.
I am a poor fellow, sir.
Why, be so still;
here's nobody will steal that from thee:
yet for the outside of thy poverty
we must make an exchange;
therefore discase thee instantly,
--thou must think there's a necessity in't,
--and change garments with this gentleman:
though the pennyworth on his side be the worst,
yet hold thee, there's some boot.
I am a poor fellow, sir.
I know ye well enough.
Nay, prithee, dispatch:
the gentleman is half flayed already.
Are you in earnest, sir?
I smell the trick on't.
Dispatch, I prithee.
Indeed, I have had earnest:
but I cannot with conscience take it.
Unbuckle, unbuckle.
Fortunate mistress,
--let my prophecy come home to ye!
--you must retire yourself into some covert:
take your sweetheart's hat
And pluck it o'er your brows,
muffle your face,
Dismantle you, and, as you can,
disliken the truth of your own seeming;
that you may-- for I do fear eyes over--
to shipboard get undescried.
I see the play so lies
That I must bear a part.
No remedy.
Have you done there?
Should I now meet my father,
He would not call me son.
Nay, you shall have no hat.
Come, lady, come.
What I do next,
shall be to tell the king of this escape
and whither they are bound;
Wherein my hope is I shall so prevail
to force him after:
in whose company I shall review Sicilia,
for whose sight I have a woman's longing.
Farwell, my friend.
Adieu, sir.
Fortune speed us!
Thus we set on, Camillo, to the sea-side.
The swifter speed the better.
I understand the business, I hear it:
to have an open ear, a quick eye, and a nimble hand,
is necessary for a cut-purse;
a good nose is requisite also,
to smell out work for the other senses.
I see this is the time that the unjust man doth thrive.
What an exchange had this been without boot!
What a boot is here with this exchange!
Sure the gods do this year connive at us,
and we may do any thing extempore.
The prince himself is about a piece of iniquity,
stealing away from his father
with his clog at his heels:
if I thought it were a piece of honesty
to acquaint the king withal,
I would not do't:
I hold it the more knavery to conceal it;
and therein am I constant to my profession.
Aside, aside; here is more matter for a hot brain:
every lane's end, every shop, church, session,
hanging, yields a careful man work.
See, see; what a man you are now!
There is no other way but to tell the king
she's a changeling
and none of your flesh and blood.
Nay, but hear me.
Go to, then.
She being none of your flesh and blood,
your flesh and blood has not offended the king;
and so your flesh and blood
Show those things you found about her,
those secret things, all but what she has with her:
this being done, let the law go whistle:
I warrant you.
I will tell the king all, every word, yea,
and his son's pranks too; who, I may say,
is no honest man,
neither to his father nor to me,
to go about to make me the king's brother-in-law.
Indeed, brother-in-law was the farthest off
you could have been to him
and then your blood had been the dearer
by I know how much an ounce.
Very wisely, puppies!
Well, let us to the king:
there is that in this fardel
will make him scratch his beard.
I know not what impediment this complaint
may be to the flight of my master.
Pray heartily he be at palace.
Though I am not naturally honest,
I am so sometimes by chance:
let me pocket up my pedlar's excrement.
how now, rustics!
whither are you bound?
To the palace, an it like your worship.
Your affairs there, what, with whom,
the condition of that fardel,
the place of your dwelling,
your names, your ages, of what having, breeding,
and any thing that is fitting to be known, discover.
We are but plain fellows, sir.
A lie; you are rough and hairy.
Let me have no lying: it becomes none but tradesmen,
Are you a courtier, an't like you, sir?
Whether it like me or no, I am a courtier.
Seest thou not the air of the court in these enfoldings?
hath not my gait in it the measure of the court?
receives not thy nose court-odor from me?
reflect I not on thy baseness court-contempt?
Thinkest thou, for that I insinuate,
or toaze from thee thy business,
I am therefore no courtier?
I am courtier cap-a-pe;
and one that will either push on
or pluck back thy business there:
whereupon I command thee to open thy affair.
My business, sir, is to the king.
What advocate hast thou to him?
I know not, an't like you.
Advocate's the court-word for a pheasant:
say you have none.
None, sir; I have no pheasant, cock nor hen.
How blessed are we that are not simple men!
Yet nature might have made me as these are,
Therefore I will not disdain.
This cannot be but a great courtier.
His garments are rich,
but he wears them not handsomely.
He seems to be the more noble in being fantastical:
a great man, I'll warrant;
I know by the picking on's teeth.
The fardel there? what's i' the fardel?
Wherefore that box?
Sir, there lies such secrets in this fardel and box,
which none must know but the king;
and which he shall know within this hour,
if I may come to the speech of him.
Age, thou hast lost thy labour.
Why, sir?
The king is not at the palace;
he is gone aboard a new ship to purge melancholy
and air himself:
for, if thou beest capable of things serious,
thou must know the king is full of grief.
So 'tis said, sir; about his son,
that should have married a shepherd's daughter.
If that shepherd be not in hand-fast, let him fly:
the curses he shall have,
the tortures he shall feel,
will break the back of man, the heart of monster.
Think you so, sir?
Not he alone shall suffer what wit
can make heavy and vengeance bitter;
but those that are germane to him,
though removed fifty times,
shall all come under the hangman:
which though it be great pity, yet it is necessary.
An old sheep-whistling rogue a ram-tender,
to offer to have his daughter come into grace!
Some say he shall be stoned;
but that death is too soft for him, say I
draw our throne into a sheep-cote!
all deaths are too few, the sharpest too easy.
Has the old man e'er a son, sir, do you hear.
an't like you, sir?
He has a son, who shall be flayed alive;
then 'nointed over with honey,
set on the head of a wasp's nest;
then stand till he be three quarters
and a dram dead;
then recovered again with aqua-vitae
or some other hot infusion;
then, raw as he is,
and in the hottest day
prognostication proclaims,
shall be be set against a brick-wall,
the sun looking with a southward eye upon him,
where he is to behold him with flies blown to death.
But what talk we of these traitorly rascals,
whose miseries are to be smiled at,
their offences being so capital?
Tell me, for you seem to be honest plain men,
what you have to the king:
being something gently considered,
I'll bring you where he is aboard,
tender your persons to his presence,
whisper him in your behalfs;
and if it be in man besides the king
to effect your suits,
here is man shall do it.
He seems to be of great authority: close with him,
give him gold;
and though authority be a stubborn bear,
yet he is oft led by the nose with gold:
show the inside of your purse
to the outside of his hand,
and no more ado.
Remember 'stoned,' and 'flayed alive.'
An't please you, sir,
to undertake the business for us,
here is that gold I have:
I'll make it as much more and leave this young man
in pawn till I bring it you.
After I have done what I promised?
Ay, sir.
Well, give me the moiety.
Are you a party in this business?
In some sort, sir: but though my case be a pitiful one,
I hope I shall not be flayed out of it.
O, that's the case of the shepherd's son: hang him,
he'll be made an example.
Comfort, good comfort!
We must to the king and show our strange sights:
he must know 'tis none of your daughter nor my sister;
we are gone else.
Sir, I will give you as much as this old man does
when the business is performed, and remain,
as he says,
your pawn till it be brought you.
I will trust you. Walk before toward the sea-side;
go on the right hand:
I will but look upon the hedge and follow you.
We are blest in this man, as I may say, even blest.
Let's before as he bids us:
he was provided to do us good.
If I had a mind to be honest,
I see Fortune would not suffer me:
she drops booties in my mouth.
I am courted now with a double occasion,
gold and a means to do the prince my master good;
which who knows how that may turn back to my advancement?
I will bring these two moles, these blind ones,
aboard him:
if he think it fit to shore them again
and that the complaint they have to the king
concerns him nothing,
let him call me rogue for being so far officious;
for I am proof against that title
and what shame else belongs to't.
To him will I present them:
there may be matter in it.
Sir, you have done enough,
and have perform'd a saint-like sorrow:
no fault could you make,
Which you have not redeem'd;
indeed, paid down more penitence
than done trespass:
at the last,
Do as the heavens have done, forget your evil;
With them forgive yourself.
Whilst I remember her and her virtues,
I cannot forget my blemishes in them,
and so still think of the wrong I did myself;
which was so much,
That heirless it hath made my kingdom
and destroy'd the sweet'st companion
that e'er man bred his hopes out of.
True, too true, my lord:
If, one by one, you wedded all the world,
Or from the all that are took something good,
To make a perfect woman,
she you kill'd would be unparallel'd.
I think so. Kill'd!
She I kill'd! I did so:
but thou strikest me sorely, to say I did;
it is as bitter upon thy tongue as in my thought:
now, good now,
Say so but seldom.
Not at all, good lady:
You might have spoken a thousand things
that would have done the time more benefit
and graced your kindness better.
You are one of those would have him wed again.
If you would not so,
You pity not the state,
nor the remembrance of his most sovereign name;
consider little what dangers,
by his highness' fail of issue,
May drop upon his kingdom
and devour incertain lookers on.
What were more holy
than to rejoice the former queen is well?
What holier than, for royalty's repair,
For present comfort and for future good,
To bless the bed of majesty again
with a sweet fellow to't?
There is none worthy,
Respecting her that's gone.
Besides, the gods will
have fulfill'd their secret purposes;
For has not the divine Apollo said,
Is't not the tenor of his oracle,
That King Leontes shall not have an heir
till his lost child be found?
which that it shall, is all as monstrous
to our human reason
As my Antigonus to break his grave
and come again to me; who, on my life,
Did perish with the infant.
'Tis your counsel my lord
should to the heavens be contrary,
Oppose against their wills.
Care not for issue;
The crown will find an heir:
great Alexander left his to the worthiest;
so his successor was like to be the best.
Good Paulina,
Who hast the memory of Hermione,
I know, in honour,
O, that ever I had squared me to thy counsel!
then, even now,
I might have look'd upon my queen's full eyes,
Have taken treasure from her lips--
And left them more rich for what they yielded.
Thou speak'st truth.
No more such wives;
therefore, no wife: one worse,
And better used,
would make her sainted spirit again possess her corpse,
and on this stage,
Where we're offenders now, appear soul-vex'd,
And begin, 'Why to me?'
Had she such power,
She had just cause.
She had; and would incense me to murder her I married.
I should so.
Were I the ghost that walk'd,
I'ld bid you mark her eye,
and tell me for what dull part in't you chose her;
then I'ld shriek, that even your ears should rift
to hear me;
and the words that follow'd should be
'Remember mine.'
Stars, stars, And all eyes else dead coals!
Fear thou no wife;
I'll have no wife, Paulina.
Will you swear never to marry
but by my free leave?
Never, Paulina; so be blest my spirit!
Then, good my lords, bear witness to his oath.
You tempt him over-much.
Unless another,
As like Hermione as is her picture,
Affront his eye.
Good madam,--
I have done.
Yet, if my lord will marry,--if you will, sir,
No remedy, but you will,
--give me the office to choose you a queen:
she shall not be so young as was your former;
but she shall be such
as,walk'd your first queen's ghost,
it should take joy to see her in your arms.
My true Paulina,
We shall not marry till thou bid'st us.
That shall be when your first queen's again in breath;
Never till then.
One that gives out himself Prince Florizel,
Son of Polixenes, with his princess,
she the fairest I have yet beheld,
desires access to your high presence.
What with him?
he comes not like to his father's greatness:
his approach, so out of circumstance and sudden,
tells us 'Tis not a visitation framed,
but forced by need and accident. What train?
But few, and those but mean.
His princess, say you, with him?
Ay, the most peerless piece of earth, I think,
That e'er the sun shone bright on.
O Hermione,
As every present time doth boast itself
above a better gone,
so must thy grave give way to what's seen now!
Sir, you yourself have said and writ so,
but your writing now is colder than that theme,
'She had not been, Nor was not to be equall'd;'
--thus your verse flow'd with her beauty once:
'tis shrewdly ebb'd,
to say you have seen a better.
Pardon, madam:
The one I have almost forgot,--your pardon,--
The other, when she has obtain'd your eye,
Will have your tongue too. This is a creature,
Would she begin a sect,
might quench the zeal o f all professors else,
make proselytes of who she but bid follow.
How! not women?
Women will love her,
that she is a woman more worth than any man; men,
that she is the rarest of all women.
Go, Cleomenes;
Yourself, assisted with your honour'd friends,
Bring them to our embracement.
Still, 'tis strange
He thus should steal upon us.
Had our prince,
Jewel of children, seen this hour,
he had pair'd well with this lord:
there was not full a month between their births.
Prithee, no more; cease;
thou know'st he dies to me again when talk'd of:
sure, When I shall see this gentleman,
thy speeches will bring me to consider
that which may unfurnish me of reason.
They are come.
Your mother was most true to wedlock, prince;
For she did print your royal father off,
Conceiving you: were I but twenty-one,
Your father's image is so hit in you,
His very air, that I should call you brother,
As I did him,
and speak of something wildly by us
perform'd before.
Most dearly welcome! and your fair princess,
--goddess!--O, alas!
I lost a couple,
that 'twixt heaven and earth
might thus have stood
begetting wonder as you, gracious couple, do:
and then I lost--
All mine own folly--the society,
Amity too, of your brave father, whom,
Though bearing misery,
I desire my life once more to look on him.
By his command have I here touch'd Sicilia
and from him give you all greetings
that a king, at friend,
Can send his brother:
and, but infirmity which waits upon worn times
hath something seized his wish'd ability,
he had himself the lands and waters 'twixt your throne
and his measured to look upon you; whom he loves--
He bade me say so--
more than all the sceptres
and those that bear them living.
O my brother,
Good gentleman!
the wrongs I have done thee stir afresh within me,
and these thy offices, So rarely kind,
are as interpreters of my behind-hand slackness.
Welcome hither, As is the spring to the earth.
And hath he too exposed this paragon
to the fearful usage,
At least ungentle, of the dreadful Neptune,
To greet a man not worth her pains,
much less the adventure of her person?
Good my lord,
She came from Libya.
Where the warlike Smalus,
That noble honour'd lord, is fear'd and loved?
Most royal sir, from thence; from him,
whose daughter his tears proclaim'd his,
parting with her: thence,
A prosperous south-wind friendly, we have cross'd,
To execute the charge my father gave me
for visiting your highness:
my best train I have from your Sicilian shores dismiss'd;
Who for Bohemia bend,
to signify not only my success in Libya, sir,
But my arrival
and my wife's in safety here where we are.
The blessed gods purge all infection from our air
whilst you do climate here!
You have a holy father, A graceful gentleman;
against whose person,
So sacred as it is, I have done sin:
For which the heavens, taking angry note,
Have left me issueless; and your father's blest,
As he from heaven merits it,
with you worthy his goodness.
What might I have been,
Might I a son and daughter now have look'd on,
Such goodly things as you!
Most noble sir,
That which I shall report will bear no credit,
Were not the proof so nigh. Please you, great sir,
Bohemia greets you from himself by me;
Desires you to attach his son, who has--
His dignity and duty both cast off--
Fled from his father, from his hopes,
and with a shepherd's daughter.
Where's Bohemia? speak.
Here in your city; I now came from him:
I speak amazedly;
and it becomes my marvel and my message.
To your court whiles he was hastening, in the chase,
it seems, of this fair couple,
meets he on the way the father of this seeming lady
and her brother,
having both their country quitted with this young prince.
Camillo has betray'd me;
Whose honour and whose honesty
till now endured all weathers.
Lay't so to his charge:
He's with the king your father.
Who? Camillo?
Camillo, sir; I spake with him;
who now has these poor men in question.
Never saw I wretches so quake: they kneel,
they kiss the earth;
Forswear themselves as often as they speak:
Bohemia stops his ears,
and threatens them with divers deaths in death.
O my poor father!
The heaven sets spies upon us,
will not have our contract celebrated.
You are married?
We are not, sir, nor are we like to be;
The stars, I see, will kiss the valleys first:
The odds for high and low's alike.
My lord, Is this the daughter of a king?
She is, when once she is my wife.
That 'once' I see by your good father's speed
will come on very slowly.
I am sorry,
Most sorry, you have broken from his liking
Where you were tied in duty,
and as sorry your choice is not so rich in worth as beauty,
That you might well enjoy her.
Dear, look up:
Though Fortune, visible an enemy,
Should chase us with my father,
power no jot hath she to change our loves.
Beseech you, sir, remember since you owed no more
to time than I do now:
with thought of such affections,
Step forth mine advocate; at your request
my father will grant precious things as trifles.
Would he do so, I'ld beg your precious mistress,
Which he counts but a trifle.
Sir, my liege,
Your eye hath too much youth in't:
not a month 'Fore your queen died,
she was more worth such gazes
than what you look on now.
I thought of her,
Even in these looks I made.
But your petition is yet unanswer'd.
I will to your father:
your honour not o'erthrown by your desires,
I am friend to them and you:
upon which errand I now go toward him;
therefore follow me and mark what way I make:
come, good my lord.
Beseech you, sir, were you present at this relation?
I was by at the opening of the fardel,
heard the old shepherd deliver the manner
how he found it:
whereupon, after a little amazedness,
we were all commanded out of the chamber;
only this methought I heard the shepherd say,
he found the child.
I would most gladly know the issue of it.
I make a broken delivery of the business;
but the changes I perceived in the king and Camillo
were very notes of admiration:
they seemed almost, with staring on one another,
to tear the cases of their eyes;
there was speech in their dumbness,
language in their very gesture;
they looked as they had heard of a world ransomed,
or one destroyed:
a notable passion of wonder appeared in them;
but the wisest beholder,
that knew no more but seeing,
could not say if the importance were joy or sorrow;
but in the extremity of the one, it must needs be.
Here comes a gentleman that haply knows more.
The news, Rogero?
Nothing but bonfires: the oracle is fulfilled;
the king's daughter is found:
such a deal of wonder is broken out within this hour
that ballad-makers cannot be able to express it.
Here comes the Lady Paulina's steward:
he can deliver you more. How goes it now, sir?
this news which is called true
is so like an old tale
that the verity of it is in strong suspicion:
has the king found his heir?
Most true, if ever truth were pregnant by circumstance:
that which you hear you'll swear you see,
there is such unity in the proofs.
The mantle of Queen Hermione's,
her jewel about the neck of it,
the letters of Antigonus found with it
which they know to be his character,
the majesty of the creature in resemblance of the mother,
the affection of nobleness
which nature shows above her breeding,
and many other evidences proclaim her with all certainty
to be the king's daughter.
Did you see the meeting of the two kings?
No.
Then have you lost a sight,
which was to be seen,
cannot be spoken of.
There might you have beheld one joy crown another,
so and in such manner that it seemed sorrow
wept to take leave of them,
for their joy waded in tears.
There was casting up of eyes,
holding up of hands,
with countenances of such distraction
that they were to be known by garment,
not by favour.
Our king, being ready to leap out of himself
for joy of his found daughter,
as if that joy were now become a loss,
cries 'O, thy mother, thy mother!'
then asks Bohemia forgiveness;
then embraces his son-in-law;
then again worries he his daughter with clipping her;
now he thanks the old shepherd,
which stands by like a weather-bitten conduit
of many kings' reigns.
I never heard of such another encounter,
which lames report to follow it
and undoes description to do it.
What, pray you, became of Antigonus,
that carried hence the child?
Like an old tale still,
which will have matter to rehearse,
though credit be asleep and not an ear open.
He was torn to pieces with a bear:
this avouches the shepherd's son;
who has not only his innocence,
which seems much, to justify him,
but a handkerchief and rings
of his that Paulina knows.
What became of his bark and his followers?
Wrecked the same instant of their master's death
and in the view of the shepherd:
so that all the instruments
which aided to expose the child
were even then lost when it was found.
But O, the noble combat that 'twixt joy and sorrow
was fought in Paulina!
She had one eye declined
for the loss of her husband,
another elevated that the oracle was fulfilled:
she lifted the princess from the earth,
and so locks her in embracing,
as if she would pin her to her heart
that she might no more be in danger of losing.
The dignity of this act was worth the audience
of kings and princes; for by such was it acted.
One of the prettiest touches of all
and that which angled for mine eyes,
caught the water though not the fish, was when,
at the relation of the queen's death,
with the manner how she came to't bravely confessed
and lamented by the king,
how attentiveness wounded his daughter;
till, from one sign of dolour to another, she did,
with an 'Alas,'
I would fain say, bleed tears,
for I am sure my heart wept blood.
Who was most marble there changed colour;
some swooned, all sorrowed:
if all the world could have seen 't,
the woe had been universal.
Are they returned to the court?
No: the princess hearing of her mother's statue,
which is in the keeping of Paulina,
--a piece many years in doing and now newly performed
by that rare Italian master,
Julio Romano, who, had he himself eternity
and could put breath into his work,
would beguile Nature of her custom,
so perfectly he is her ape:
he so near to Hermione hath done Hermione
that they say one would speak to her
and stand in hope of answer:
thither with all greediness of affection
are they gone,
and there they intend to sup.
I thought she had some great matter there in hand;
for she hath privately twice or thrice a day,
ever since the death of Hermione,
visited that removed house.
Shall we thither and with our company piece the rejoicing?
Who would be thence that has the benefit of access?
every wink of an eye some new grace will be born:
our absence makes us unthrifty to our knowledge.
Let's along.
Now, had I not the dash of my former life in me,
would preferment drop on my head.
I brought the old man and his son aboard the prince:
told him I heard them talk of a fardel and I know not what:
but he at that time, overfond
of the shepherd's daughter,
so he then took her to be,
who began to be much sea-sick,
and himself little better,
extremity of weather continuing,
this mystery remained undiscovered.
But 'tis all one to me; for had I been
the finder out of this secret,
it would not have relished among my other discredits.
Here come those I have done good to against my will,
and already appearing in the blossoms of their fortune.
Come, boy; I am past moe children,
but thy sons and daughters will be all gentlemen born.
You are well met, sir.
You denied to fight with me this other day,
because I was no gentleman born.
See you these clothes?
say you see them not
and think me still no gentleman born:
you were best say these robes
are not gentlemen born:
give me the lie, do,
and try whether I am not now a gentleman born.
I know you are now, sir, a gentleman born.
Ay, and have been so any time these four hours.
And so have I, boy.
So you have:
but I was a gentleman born before my father;
for the king's son took me by the hand,
and called me brother;
and then the two kings called my father brother;
and then the prince my brother
and the princess my sister called my father father;
and so we wept, and there was the first gentleman-like tears
that ever we shed.
We may live, son, to shed many more.
Ay; or else 'twere hard luck,
being in so preposterous estate as we are.
I humbly beseech you, sir,
to pardon me all the faults I have committed
to your worship
and to give me your good report
to the prince my master.
Prithee, son, do; for we must be gentle,
now we are gentlemen.
Thou wilt amend thy life?
Ay, an it like your good worship.
Give me thy hand:
I will swear to the prince thou art
as honest a true fellow as any is in Bohemia.
You may say it, but not swear it.
Not swear it, now I am a gentleman?
Let boors and franklins say it, I'll swear it.
How if it be false, son?
If it be ne'er so false,
a true gentleman may swear it in the behalf of his friend:
and I'll swear to the prince thou art a tall fellow of thy hands
and that thou wilt not be drunk;
but I know thou art no tall fellow of thy hands
and that thou wilt be drunk: but I'll swear it,
and I would thou wouldst be a tall fellow of thy hands.
I will prove so, sir, to my power.
Ay, by any means prove a tall fellow:
if I do not wonder how thou darest venture to be drunk,
not being a tall fellow, trust me not.
Hark! the kings and the princes, our kindred,
are going to see the queen's picture.
Come, follow us: we'll be thy good masters.
O grave and good Paulina, the great comfort
That I have had of thee!
What, sovereign sir,
I did not well I meant well.
All my services you have paid home:
but that you have vouchsafed,
With your crown'd brother
and these your contracted Heirs of your kingdoms,
my poor house to visit,
It is a surplus of your grace,
which never my life may last to answer.
O Paulina,
We honour you with trouble:
but we came to see the statue of our queen:
your gallery have we pass'd through,
not without much content in many singularities;
but we saw not that which my daughter came to look upon,
The statue of her mother.
As she lived peerless,
So her dead likeness, I do well believe,
Excels whatever yet you look'd upon
Or hand of man hath done;
therefore I keep it lonely, apart.
But here it is:
prepare to see the life
as lively mock'd as ever still sleep mock'd death:
behold, and say 'tis well.
I like your silence,
it the more shows off your wonder: but yet speak;
first, you, my liege,
Comes it not something near?
Her natural posture!
Chide me, dear stone,
that I may say indeed thou art Hermione; or rather,
thou art she in thy not chiding,
for she was as tender as infancy and grace.
But yet, Paulina, Hermione was not so much wrinkled,
nothing so aged as this seems.
O, not by much.
So much the more our carver's excellence;
Which lets go by some sixteen years
and makes her as she lived now.
As now she might have done,
So much to my good comfort,
as it is now piercing to my soul.
O, thus she stood, even with such life of majesty,
warm life,
As now it coldly stands, when first I woo'd her!
I am ashamed:
does not the stone rebuke me
for being more stone than it?
O royal piece, there's magic in thy majesty,
which has my evils conjured to remembrance
and from thy admiring daughter took the spirits,
Standing like stone with thee.
And give me leave,
And do not say 'tis superstition,
that I kneel and then implore her blessing.
Lady, Dear queen, that ended when I but began,
Give me that hand of yours to kiss.
O, patience!
The statue is but newly fix'd, the colour's not dry.
My lord, your sorrow was too sore laid on,
Which sixteen winters cannot blow away,
So many summers dry;
scarce any joy did ever so long live;
no sorrow but kill'd itself much sooner.
Dear my brother,
Let him that was the cause of this have power
to take off so much grief from you
as he will piece up in himself.
Indeed, my lord,
If I had thought the sight
of my poor image would thus have wrought you,
--for the stone is mine--
I'ld not have show'd it.
Do not draw the curtain.
No longer shall you gaze on't,
lest your fancy may think anon it moves.
Let be, let be.
Would I were dead, but that,
methinks, already--
What was he that did make it?
See, my lord,
Would you not deem it breathed?
and that those veins did verily bear blood?
Masterly done:
The very life seems warm upon her lip.
The fixture of her eye has motion in't,
As we are mock'd with art.
I'll draw the curtain:
My lord's almost so far transported
that he'll think anon it lives.
O sweet Paulina,
Make me to think so twenty years together!
No settled senses of the world
can match the pleasure of that madness.
Let 't alone.
I am sorry, sir, I have thus far stirr'd you:
but I could afflict you farther.
Do, Paulina;
For this affliction has a taste
as sweet as any cordial comfort.
Still, methinks, there is an air comes from her:
what fine chisel could ever yet cut breath?
Let no man mock me, for I will kiss her.
Good my lord, forbear:
The ruddiness upon her lip is wet;
You'll mar it if you kiss it,
stain your own with oily painting.
Shall I draw the curtain?
No, not these twenty years.
So long could I stand by, a looker on.
Either forbear,
Quit presently the chapel,
or resolve you for more amazement.
If you can behold it, I'll make the statue move indeed,
descend and take you by the hand;
but then you'll think-- Which I protest against--
I am assisted by wicked powers.
What you can make her do
I am content to look on: what to speak,
I am content to hear;
for 'tis as easy to make her speak as move.
It is required
You do awake your faith.
Then all stand still;
On: those that think it is unlawful business I am about,
let them depart.
Proceed:
No foot shall stir.
Music, awake her; strike!
'Tis time; descend; be stone no more; approach;
Strike all that look upon with marvel.
Come, I'll fill your grave up: stir, nay, come away,
Bequeath to death your numbness,
for from him dear life redeems you.
You perceive she stirs:
Start not; her actions shall be holy
as you hear my spell is lawful:
do not shun her until you see her die again;
for then you kill her double.
Nay, present your hand:
When she was young you woo'd her;
now in age is she become the suitor?
O, she's warm!
If this be magic, let it be an art
Lawful as eating.
She embraces him.
She hangs about his neck:
If she pertain to life let her speak too.
Ay, and make't manifest where she has lived,
Or how stolen from the dead.
That she is living,
Were it but told you,
should be hooted at like an old tale:
but it appears she lives,
Though yet she speak not. Mark a little while.
Please you to interpose, fair madam:
kneel and pray your mother's blessing.
Turn, good lady;
Our Perdita is found.
You gods, look down and from your sacred vials
pour your graces upon my daughter's head!
Tell me, mine own.
Where hast thou been preserved?
where lived?
how found thy father's court?
for thou shalt hear that I,
Knowing by Paulina
that the oracle gave hope thou wast in being,
have preserved myself to see the issue.
There's time enough for that;
Lest they desire upon this push
to trouble your joys with like relation.
Go together, you precious winners all;
your exultation partake to every one.
I, an old turtle,
will wing me to some wither'd bough and there
My mate, that's never to be found again,
Lament till I am lost.
O, peace, Paulina!
Thou shouldst a husband take by my consent,
As I by thine a wife: this is a match,
And made between's by vows.
Thou hast found mine;
But how, is to be question'd; for I saw her,
As I thought, dead,
and have in vain said many a prayer upon her grave.
I'll not seek far--
For him, I partly know his mind
--to find thee An honourable husband.
Come, Camillo, and take her by the hand,
whose worth and honesty is richly noted
and here justified
By us, a pair of kings.
Let's from this place.
What! look upon my brother:
both your pardons,
that e'er I put between your holy
looks my ill suspicion.
This is your son-in-law,
And son unto the king, who,
heavens directing,
Is troth-plight to your daughter.
Good Paulina, lead us from hence,
where we may leisurely each one
demand an answer to his part
Perform'd in this wide gap of time
since first we were dissever'd: hastily lead away.